##name	Alternative Medicine Glossary
##sourceLang	English
##targetLang	English
##bgl_sourceCharset	cp1252
##bgl_targetCharset	cp1252
##bgl_defaultEncoding	cp1252
##bgl_sourceEncoding	cp1252
##bgl_targetEncoding	cp1252
##sourceCharset	UTF-8
##targetCharset	UTF-8
##utf8Encoding	
##spellingAlternatives	
##caseSensitive	
##author	Jos-hua Medicine man
##email	info@hps-online.com
##description	Comprehensive review of alternative medicine and alternative health issues. FREE glossary, and expert advise for healthy active living.
##browsingEnabled	
##bgl_creationTime	2000/08/09, 13:41
##bgl_middleUpdated	2000/08/09, 14:03
8EAF66FD.bmp	File: 8EAF66FD.bmp
C2EEF3F6.html	File: C2EEF3F6.html
Acupressure	Acupressure is a type of body work based on the same concept as ACUPUNCTURE. Rather than inserting needles into the body for treatment, Acupressure uses pressure applied from the finger tip or knuckle, or from a blunt tip instrument to stimulate specific points on the acupuncture meridians (Energy Channels) on the patients body.
Acupuncture	Acupuncture is an ancient oriental medical system based on the energy meridians that run the length of the body. These meridians correspond to the major organs of the body and contain hundreds of acupuncture points. These points are stimulated with special needles that regulate the flow of energy. The points can also be stimulated with low power laser and RED L.E.D. devices. Acupuncture is commonly used to treat pain, but also can be used to treat many conditions including drug or alcohol addiction, sinus problems, tendentious and many other symptoms resulting from improper function of the various organs. Acupuncture was fist discovered on the battlefields of ancient China, when soldiers wounded by arrows reported that other long-standing chronic ailments had suddenly disappeared. Before long, Chinese physicians found that the body has a complex network of invisible energy channels which Ki, the vital energy of life travels. They found 12 major and dozens of minor channels and discovered that each one was functionally related to specific organs and glands. These channels, though invisible to the eye, have been 'mapped' by Kirlian photography in Russia.
Applied Kinesiology	Applied Kinesiology or A.K. is used as a diagnostic tool to evaluate healing systems and treat an individual’s structural, chemical and mental aspects. Through muscle testing to diagnose, a patients condition including nutrition, muscle manipulation and diet and evaluated, strengthened and balanced. Acupressure, exercise and education are used to help restore balance and harmony in the body and maintain well being throughout life.
Aromatherapy	Aromatherapy is the therapeutic use of ESSENTIAL OILS extracted from the flowers, stems, leaves, roots, or fruits of a plant or tree. These oils are the most potent form of herbal use and are known for their beneficial healing properties. The physiological and psychological benefits of the Essential Oils are achieved by absorption through the skin and <a href="http://www.hps-online.com/haroma.htm">inhalation</A>. The latter can be accomplished through either natural evaporation or some type of diffusing device.
Ayurveda	Ayurveda is the ancient Indian art & science of healing & rejuvenation. It is a preventive and holistic system of medicine that aims at a balanced state of inner harmony, health, & natural well-being. It provides the individual with a complete life - regimen and deals with the body and mind through an integrated science of lifestyle counseling combined with the use of natural herbs, roots and minerals. Ayurveda is the medicine of nature and of life.
Bach Flower Remedies	Bach Flower Remedies are a set of 38 different herbal remedies (plus one combination remedy) made from the specially prepared, "potentized" essence of the petals and heads of flowers. Each essence is made from a particular type of flower and preserved in unflavored brandy to prevent spoilage. Bach Flower Remedies are non-toxic, non-addictive, and utilize the mood-altering properties of the plants to harmonize and balance emotional sensitivities. The remedies act as catalysts to alleviate the underlying causes of stress.
Bioenergetics	Bioenergetics is a method of studying and understanding the human personality in terms of the body and its energetic processes. In Bioenergetic theory, it is believed that the body and the mind are functionally identical. What happens in the mind reflects what is happening in the body and vice versa. It is a therapeutic technique that utilizes many bodywork methods and exercises to help an individual become aware of tensions in the body and release them through appropriate movement. Bioenergetics also involves verbal exploration of emotional conflicts and their relationship to an individual's personal history.
Bowen Therapy	Bowen therapy is a gentle, yet powerful healing technique that utilizes a specific series of muscle and connective tissue movements to treat a wide range of chronic musculo-skeletal problems and sports related injuries. This unique physical/vibrational approach to healing sends a gentle signal to the body that allows the neuromuscular system to reset all tension levels thus promoting natural healing. The relaxation and relief one feels is profound and lasting, affecting the muscular, skeletal, digestive, respiratory and energetic systems. Bowen Therapy is a way of giving the body the gentle hint that it needs to find its own way back to health and balance.
Breathing Therapy	Breathing therapy is the art and science of cultivating Ki through correct breathing and circulating it through body & mind with soft rhythmic exercises. In Taoist therapy, Ki is literally referred to as 'medicine'. Patients under breathing therapy are advised to spend an hour or two each day 'sitting still doing nothing' as they practice breath control to balance their energies. If the patient is too weak to do the related calisthenics, or even sit up straight, the breathing is performed in reclining position, in which case the mind rather than the body 'moves energy' (yun-chee) to distribute it to the diseased areas. People often turn to Taoist healing arts as a last resort- out of sheer desperation to live. Prior to falling ill they never give Tao a thought. Owing to the life-and-death nature of their struggle, such patients usually manage to master the methods taught very quickly, and they have no trouble mustering sufficient discipline to sit still and breath deeply for up to eight hours per day. It is amazing what the body and mind are capable of when life is at stake. Such examples should, however, serve as lessons to ordinary healthy people who still claim they 'don't have time' to practice for Tao. Practicing a little deep breathing every day in one of the best preventatives against disease and premature death. Learning how to breath correctly on your deathbed is a bit late in the game for health and longevity.
Chakra Balancing	Chakra balancing is the clearing of energy blocks from the Chakras. By utilizing various methods, the obstruction energy in the chakras can be balanced and harmonized.
Chakras	Chakra in Sanskrit, the ancient language of India, means “what revolves” or “wheel,” indicating that these force centers are wheels of energy. There are 7 in the body.
Chelation Therapy	Chelation therapy is a safe, painless, non-surgical medical procedure used to remove undesirable heavy metals such as lead, mercury, nickel, copper, cadmium, and others from the body. More recently Chelation Therapy has also been used to reverse symptoms of atherosclerosis or arteriosclerosis (hardening of arteries) by removing the obstructive plaque that has built up in circulatory system. Atherosclerosis is caused by many complex factors including the abnormal accumulation of metallic elements in the body.
Colenema's	Colenema's are a natural form of colonic irrigation's that send water coursing all the way through the entire length of the colon including the transverse and ascending portions. The water can be mixed with garlic, lemon juice, Bentonite clay or coffee; each stimulating and producing a different cleansing effect on the colon and adjundant organs. <a href="http://www.hps-online.com/item4.htm">Colenema's</A>work entirely by gravity, not pumps and is completely safe to use alone. The term &quotColenema", in fact refers to a technique, that is a derivative of the &quotColenema Board".
Colonic Therapy	Colonic irrigation's are a method therapy of bowel cleansing. Colonic cleanliness is of tremendous importance to general health. When the <a href="http://www.hps-online.com/bcc1.htm">colon becomes polluted</A> with stagnating waste and its tissue becomes damaged by abrasions and infective ulceration's, the end products of poor digestion, lowered metabolism and putrefactive fermentation waste find easy entrance into the blood, lymph and other body fluids. It is an indisputable fact that not only illness and old age, but even death are due to the accumulation of waste products of body chemistry and, on the other hand, to the inability of the body to replenish its cellular structures and organs with fresh vital nutrients. Therefore, immunity and freedom from disease can be had and old age and death can be deferred only as long as body wastes are kept at a minimum and fresh, vital material of the first order is supplied for growth and repair of the body. Colonic irrigation are a proven and safe method for cleansing the bowel.
Colostrum	Colostrum is a thin, yellowish breast secretion produced by all mammalian mothers 2 - 3 days after giving birth. Colostrum is natures first food. It is high in protein, low in fat and sugar, has 10 - 17 times the iron content of milk and more A and D vitamin then milk. Antibodies are formed from immunoglobulins, which protect the new born until it's immune system is working.
Ear Coning	Ear coning or ear candling is an ancient technique used for the relief of pain and pressure in the outer and middle ear. This technique assists people experiencing itching, equilibrium problems, pain, pressure, blockages, ear and sinus infections, and other problems related to the ear. The 30 - 45 minute process is painless, very soothing, and relaxing. Some people experienced improved physical balance, mental clarity and pain relief through the removal of accumulated ear wax and other foreign debris.
Essential Oils	Essential oils are the concentrated vital essences of the aromatic plants. They contain potent therapeutic properties. Essential Oils are mainly used in Aromatherapy, a system of healing the body through massage, inhalation or bathing. Studies show that Essential Oils are carried through the circulatory system to all the organs and eventually through the elimination system. Each organ takes from the Essential Oil what it needs. WARNING: Essential Oils are extremely potent.
Feng Shui	Feng Shui is the Chinese art of placement. It is a part of Taoist disciplines. The theory behind Feng Shui (pronounced Funk Schway) is that by changing the environment one can literally tip the scales of fortune.
Herbal Therapy	Herbal therapy, which in Taoist tradition always includes diet and nutrition, is the oldest and most widely used method in the Chinese system of health care. It evolved over thousands of years by patient empirical observation of nature and trial-and-error experimentation. All Chinese herbs are categorized according to their basic biochemical natures and therapeutic effects, which determine what Chinese herbalists call their gui-jing, or 'natural affinities'. Gui-jing literally means 'return to meridians', and indicates which organ/meridian systems a particular drug has a natural affinity for after it has been ingested and metabolized. There are numerous methods for administering herbal remedies.
Homeopathy	Homeopathy is an effective and scientific system of healing which assists the natural tendency of the body to heal itself. It recognizes that all symptoms of ill health are expressions of disharmony within the whole person and that it is the patient who needs treatment not the disease. Homeopathic remedies work by stimulation the body's own healing power. <a href="http://www.hps-online.com/hhomoeo.htm">Homeopathic remedies</A> cannot cause side effects and you cannot become addicted to them. This is because only a very minute amount of the active ingredient is used in a specially prepared formula.
Iridology	Iridology deals with internal body tissue change that manifests itself in the irises of the eyes. <a href="http://www.hps-online.com/hirid.htm">Iridology</A>is a system of analyzing and caring for the body through the use of drugless and nature-cure methods. It is the science and practices revealing inflammation, where that inflammation is located within the body and what stage it is manifesting. Iridology is a science whereby the doctor or operator can tell from the markings or signs in the iris of the eye the reflex condition of the various organs of the body. In other words, it is the science of determining acute, sub-acute, chronic, and destructive stages in the affected organs in the body through their corresponding areas in the iris. Drug deposits, inherent weaknesses and living habits of the patient are also revealed in the iris of the eye.
Ki Energy	Ki energy (referred to also as Chee, Chi, Qui) is the life force that animates all living things. Ki energy is cultivated and controlled within oneself. Ki can be directed externally for the purpose of self defense and attack as in the marital arts; Ki can also be directed internally for the purpose of health and longevity, healing and stress reduction, productivity and creativity, and inner power and spiritual growth as in Sunin Do. Four qualities of Ki energy circulate throughout the body system: negative, neutral, positive and pure. Good health and vitality depend on the predominance of positive Ki energy - the unrestricted flow of Ki in the body. This vital life force has the power to alleviate or reduce the impact of stress and trauma that occurs to the entire system.
Reflexology	Reflexology, also known as foot massage, is a specialized branch of Chinese therapy that has received some attention in the West in recent years. Six major energy meridians terminate in the feet: spleen, kidneys, liver, stomach, gallbladder, bladder- as do the major nerves of the autonomous nervous system. Massaging the feet therefore stimulates the organs and glands associated with those meridians and nerves. Foot massage is easy to perform on yourself at home using either the thumbs or forefinger knuckles to press and rub deeply and rhythmically at the various vital foot points, and the benefits are manifold.
Reiki	Reiki is a powerful natural system of healing that utilizes specific techniques for restoring and balancing the natural life force energy within the body. It is a holistic, natural, hands on energy healing system that touches individuals on all levels; Mind, Body Spirit. <a href="http://www.hps-online.com/hreiki.htm">Reiki</A>(pronounced Ray-Key) is a Japanese word representing Universal Life Energy, the energy that is all around us. It is derived from rei meaning &quottranscendental spirit" or &quotuniversal" and ki meaning &quotvital life force energy".
Shiatsu	Shiatsu massage is a form of natural healing. Touch is the essence of Shiatsu. It is a proven method of restoring and maintaining health by adjusting and balancing the body's primary communication system. Shiatsu affects the movement of energy (known as Ki, Chi, Chee, Qui) that circulates within well defined passageways or meridians. In Shiatsu massage one applies various strengths of pressure along these meridians and other specific points of the body to balance the energy as it flows to the organs, glands, muscles, nerves and blood. Shiatsu produces a heightened sense of well-being in body, mind and spirit.
