##name	Hepatitis Central (TM) Liver Disease Medical Glossary
##sourceLang	English
##targetLang	English
##bgl_sourceCharset	cp1252
##bgl_targetCharset	cp1252
##bgl_defaultEncoding	cp1252
##bgl_sourceEncoding	cp1252
##bgl_targetEncoding	cp1252
##sourceCharset	UTF-8
##targetCharset	UTF-8
##utf8Encoding	
##spellingAlternatives	
##caseSensitive	
##author	Vikki Shaw
##copyright	<a href=http://hepatitis-central.com/hcv/glossary/main.html></a>
##email	hepatitis-central@hepatitis-central.com
##description	Medical terms for liver disease with an emphasis on Hepatitis.
##browsingEnabled	
##bgl_creationTime	2000/08/15, 12:19
##bgl_middleUpdated	2000/08/23, 12:23
8EAF66FD.bmp	File: 8EAF66FD.bmp
C2EEF3F6.html	File: C2EEF3F6.html
(-)sense RNA (minus-sense RNA)|(-)sense RNA|minus-sense RNA	A virus with a single-stranded RNA genome of the opposite polarity ('sense') as mRNA <BR>
(+)sense RNA (plus-sense RNA)|(+)sense RNA|plus-sense RNA	A virus with a single-stranded RNA genome of the same polarity ('sense') as mRNA<BR>
(HTL)--Helper T Cell|HTL|Helper T Cell	Helper T Cells are activated by binding to an HTL specific epitope presented by cells in a similar fashion as CTL epitopes are presented. When activated, HTLs help expand the immune response by releasing chemicals which stimulate the CTL response and the B-cell antibody responses
17-KS	17-ketosteroids
A&P	Abdominal & Perineal
a.c.|a c|ac	Ante Cibum--Before Meals
A.E.|A E|AE	Adverse Experience
A.E.R.|A E R|AER	Adverse experience report: A document in a prespecified format used to collect information on all reportable adverse experiences
AABB	American Association of Blood Banks
AAFP	American Academy of Family Physicians
AAH	Acute Alcoholic Hepatitis
AAI	American Association of Immunologists
AAPB	American Association of Pathologists and Bacteriologists
AASLD	American Association for the Study of Liver Disease
AAV	Adeno Associated Virus
ab	Prefix meaning away from, from
Ab	Abbreviation for Antibody
AB	Abdominal
Abacterial	Free from bacteria
Abasia	Inability to walk
Abate	To lessen or decrease
Abatement	A decrease in the severity of a pain or a symptom
ABC	Aspiration biopsy cytology
ABD	Abdomen, Abdominal
ABDOM	Abdomen, Abdominal
Abdomen	Gut, part of the body that contains the stomach, liver, intestines, spleen and other organs. Large cavity between the chest and the pelvis
Abdominal	Related to the gut
Abdominal Distention	Increased abdominal girth
Abdominal Girth	Measurement of the distance around the abdomen at a specific point (usually at the level of the umbilicus). Abdominal girth can be an objective measurement of abdominal swelling
Abdominal Pain	Sensation of discomfort, distress, or agony in the abdominal region
Abdominal Swelling	Increased abdominal girth
Abdomino	Surgical procedure in which the end portion of the sigmoid colon and the entire rectum and anus are removed. The remaining colon is brought to the surface of the body as a permanent colostomy. Known as a Perineal resection
Abdominocentesis	Paracentesis
Abdominocystic	Pertaining to the abdomen and gallbladder
Abdominoscopy	Inspection or examination of the abdominal cavity, particularly direct examination of the abdominal organs by endoscopy, peritoneoscopy. laparoscopy
Aberrant	Irregular
ABG	Arterial Blood Gases
Abirritant	An agent that relieves irritation. Diminishing or relieving irritation, soothing
ABM	Adjusted Body Mass
Abnormal	Not normal; contrary to the usual structure, behavior, condition, position, or rule. Vikki
Abnormality	Not normal. Differing in any way from the usual state, condition or structure
ABO Antigens	A system of genetically determined antigens (proteins) located on the surface of the erythrocyte. The presence of these specific antigens gives a blood its unique properties. Because of the antigen differences existing between individuals, blood groups are significant in blood transfusions, maternal-foetal incompatibilities (erythroblastosis foetalis, tissue and organ transplantation)
ABO Blood Group	One of the four blood groups A, B, AB, or O comprising the ABO system
ABO Incompatibility	A type of blood incompatibility, found rarely. Transfusion reactions may occur as a result of such incompatibility
Abortive Infection	When a virus infects a cell (or host), but cannot complete the full replication cycle, i.e. a non-productive infection
Abouchement	The termination of a vessel in a larger one
ABP	Arterial Blood Pressure
Abrosia	Lack of food
Abrupt	Sudden
Abs	Antibodies, Abs are associated with specific causes of hepatitis
Abscess	Localized pocket of pus
Absorbent	A drug that promotes the absorption of diseased tissues
Absorption	Process in which food nutrients are taken from the intestinal lumen into the bloodstream for distribution to all cells in the body
ABW	Actual Body Weight
AC	Abdominal Circumference, Abdominal Compression, Activated Charcoal, Acute Cholecystitis, Alcoholic Cirrhosis
Acacia Bark	Acacia Arabica--also called Wattle Bark. Medicinally, Acacia Bark is used as a substitute for Oak Bark. Used for diarrhea. Also used as an astringent gargle, injection, or lotion
Acalculous	Without the presence of stones, gallstones as an example
Accessory Digestive Organs	Organs that help with digestion but are not part of the digestive tract. These organs are the tongue, glands in the mouth that make saliva, gallbladder, liver, and pancreas
Accessory Spleen	Normal spleen tissue in an abnormal anatomical location
Accumulation	Build-up
ACE Inhibitor	Drug typically used to treat high blood pressure<BR>(Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme inhibitor)
Acetaminophen	The generic name for a common nonprescription medication useful in the treatment of mild pain or fever
Acetylcholine	Neurotransmitter widely distributed in body tissues with a primary function of mediating synaptic activity of the nervous system and skeletal muscles
ACG	American College of Gastroenterology
Achalasia	Constriction of the lower portion of the esophagus due to inability of the sphincter muscles to relax
Achlorhydria	Absence of hydrochloric acid from the gastric juice
Acholia	Absence of bile, or failure to secrete bile
Acholuria	Term used to describe the absence of bile pigment in the urine, usually in the context of describing a type of jaundice
Acid	Base Equilibrium--Condition in which the net rate of acid or alkali production by the body is balanced by the net rate of acid or alkali excretion from the body, resulting in a stable concentration of hydrogen ions in the body fluids
Acid Fast Bacillus	Bacteria capable of living in acidic environments, such as inside macrophages. Tuberculosis and MAI/MAC are acid fast bacilli
Acid Reflux	Disorder in which acid in the stomach comes up into the esophagus, the valve separating the stomach and esophagus does not function properly
Acidity	Sour, Acid content of any substance
Acidophilus	Microflora (good bacteria) that acts as a digestive aid and lives in your intestines helping your body fight disease. Intestinal cleanser. Helps prevent acne, bad breath, fungus, and diverticulosis. Helps in the absorption of calcium and other minerals in the body
Acidosis	High blood acidity, a condition marked by abnormally high acid levels in the blood, associated with some forms of diabetes, lung disease, and severe kidney disease
ACL	Anal Canal Length
Aconite	Also known as Fu-Tzu and Monkshood. Extremely powerful and potentially toxic herb. Considered an effective stimulant for the spleen and kidneys. Also used in the treatment for general weakness, cancer, malaise, poor circulation, and heart disease. Aconite's toxic ingredient is an extremely potent central nervous system poison called "Aconitine". Even in extremely small amounts, this potent chemical can inhibit respiration, and in larger amounts can lead to complete heart failure! Aconitine can be extremely toxic. This is definitely not an herb for casual use by the herbal novice, and if used at all, should only be done so under the close supervision & monitoring of a knowledgeable practitioner
Acrid	Has a biting taste or causes heat and irritation when applied to the skin
Activated Charcoal	An over-the-counter product that may help relieve intestinal gas
Active Control Treatment	A control treatment that involves use of a pharmacologically or medically active substance. Active controls are used when there is already an available treatment, so the use of a placebo or no treatment would be unethical
Active Immunization	The conferring of immunity through the introduction of an attenuated form of a virus; for example, the injection of cowpox virus to confer immunity to smallpox, or by the injection of a killed or inactivated virus. The principle is that the body, by learning to deal with a mild and harmless virus closely related to a more serious strain, or a dead or inactive virus, develops antibodies against the virulent, live or active virus
Acuity	Sharpness
Acupuncture	One of the oldest most commonly used medical procedures in the world, acupuncture originated more than 2,000 years ago in China. Traditional Chinese medicine believes there are more than 2,000 acupuncture points on the human body that connect pathways known as meridians, and conduct energy, or chi, throughout the body
Acute	Severe, Short. Sensing or perceiving accurately, clearly, effectively, or sensitively characterized by sharpness or severity, having a sudden onset, sharp rise, and short course
Acute Infection	Suddenly occurring infection that is severe and sharp. Relatively brief infections, i.e. a few days to a few weeks, following which the virus is usually eliminated completely from the body by the immune system
Acute Tubular Necrosis|ATN	ATN--Reversible kidney damage resulting in delayed kidney function. Among other factors, it may be caused by quality of donor organ, time of organ storage before transplantation, or medications to prevent rejection
Acute Viral Hepatitis	Hepatocellular inflammatory disease caused by certain hepatotrophic viruses. Common, important group of worldwide diseases that share clinical, biochemical, and morphologic features, but are due to different viruses
Acute Yellow Atrophy	Massive necrosis of the liver, a rare complication of viral hepatitis (fulminant hepatitis) that may also result from exposure to hepatotoxins or from drug hypersensitivity. A lobe or the entire liver shrinks, becoming a soft, flabby, yellow-brown to green mass with a wrinkled capsule. There is confluent necrosis of hepatocytes, often with fatty change. Mortality is 60% to 90%
Acyclovir-Zovirax	An antiviral drug used in the treatment of herpes
Ad Hoc Review Group	Review group that is created for the sole purpose of reviewing a specific application or set of applications. Also referred to as ad hoc study section, especially if the applications are for grant support
ADCC	Antibody Dependent Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity
Addiction	Dependence on a substance (alcohol or drugs), to the point that stopping is very difficult and causes severe mental and physical reactions
ADE	Apparent Digestive Energy
Adenine	One of the four basic nucleotides that make up DNA. White, crystalline derivative
Adenitis	Inflammation of one or several lymph nodes, or related lymphoid tissues
Adeno	Greek word for gland
Adenocarcinoma	Cancer that begins in cells that line certain internal organs. Seen under a microscope, these cancer cells grow in patterns that normally are seen only in glands
Adenoma	Non-cancerous tumor
Adenopathy	Enlargement of glands, particularly the lymph nodes
Adenovirus E1 Proteins	The very first viral gene products synthesized after cells are infected with adenovirus. The E1 region of the genome has been divided into two major transcriptional units, E1A and E1B, each expressing proteins of the same name (Adenovirus E1A Proteins and Adenovirus E1B Proteins)
Adenovirus E1A Proteins	Proteins transcribed from the E1A region of adenovirus which are involved in positive regulation of transcription of the early genes
Adenovirus E1B Proteins	Proteins transcribed from the E1B region of adenovirus which are involved in regulation of the levels of early and late gene expression
Adenovirus E2 Proteins	Proteins transcribed from the E2 region of adenovirus. Several of these are required for viral DNA replication
Adenovirus E3 Proteins	Proteins transcribed from the E3 region of adenovirus but not essential for viral replication. The E3 19K protein mediates adenovirus persistence by reducing the expression of class I major histocompatibility complex antigens on the surface of infected cells
Adenovirus E4 Proteins	Proteins transcribed from the E4 region of adenovirus. The E4 19K protein transactivates transcription of the adenovirus E2F protein and complexes with it
Adenovirus Early Proteins	Proteins encoded by adenoviruses that are synthesized prior to, and in the absence of, viral DNA replication. Proteins are involved in both positive and negative regulation of expression in viral and cellular genes, and also affect the stability of viral mRNA. Some are also involved in oncogenic transformation
Adenovirus Infections, Human|Adenovirus Infections|Human Adenovirus Infections	Respiratory and conjunctival infections caused by 33 identified serotypes of human adenoviruses
Adenoviruses|Canine	Species of the genus Mastadenovirus that causes fever, edema, vomiting, and diarrhea in dogs and encephalitis in foxes. Epizootics have also been caused in bears, wolves, coyotes, and skunks
Adherence	Degree to which patient care exactly follows study protocol
Adhesion	Fibrous band of structure by which parts abnormally adhere. Internal growth of scar tissue
Adipose Tissue	Type of connective tissue specialized for lipid (fat) storage
Adiposis	Condition of fatty infiltration or degeneration of single organs such as the heart or liver
Adjuvant	Herb used to aid the effect of a principal ingredient when added to a mixture
Adjuvant Therapy	Use of drugs or radiation therapy in the treatment of cancer along with surgery
Adjuvants, Immunologic|Adjuvants|Immunologic Adjuvants	Substances that stimulate, activate, augment, potentiate, or modulate the immune response at either the humoral or cellular level. The classical agents (Freund's adjuvant, BCG, Corynebacterium parvum, et al.) contain bacterial antigens. Some are endogenous (e.g., interferon, histamine, tuftsin, transfer factor, interleukin-1). Their mode of action is either non-specific, resulting in increased immune responsiveness to a wide variety of antigens, or antigen-specific, i.e., affecting a restricted type of immune response to a narrow group of antigens. The therapeutic efficacy of many biological response modifiers is related to their antigen-specific immunoadjuvanticity<I></I><BR>
Administration or Route of Administration|Administration|Route of Administration	How a drug or therapy is introduced into the body (i.e., intravenously, or orally)
ADP	Advanced Pancreatitis 2. Adenosine diphosphate - an energy storage molecule
Adverse Event	Less than desireable results of taking medication, also known as side effects
Adverse Experience	A toxic reaction to a treatment under study. In the CPCRA all Grade 4, life-threatening toxicities and deaths are adverse experiences, irrespective of whether or not they are believed to be due to study drug, as are any toxicities that require permanent discontinuation of study drug
Adverse Reaction	Unintended and unwanted side effect of some sort of treatment, usually drug therapy
AEP	Acute Edematous Pancreatitis
Aerosolized	A form of administration in which a drug, is turned into a fine spray or mist by a nebulizer, and inhaled
AES	Anterior Esophageal Sensor
AFB	See acid-fast bacillus
Afebrile	Without a fever
Affective Disorder	Mental disorder involving abnormal moods and emotions; affective disorders include manic depressive disorder
Afferent	Conveying towards a center
AFLP	Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy
AFP	Alpha fetoprotein. A test that measures the amount of alpha fetoprotein (AFP) in serum (blood)
AGA	American Gastroenterolgical Association
Agammaglobulinaemia	Immune deficiency
AGE	Acute Gastroenteritis
Age Spots	Also called Liver Spots and Lentigo Senilis. Fat spots evenly colored with darker pigment that occur on the exposed skin particulalry in persons aged 50
Agenesis	Failure of development
Agglutinate	The process by which cells are made to adhere to one another, usually through the actions of an agglutinin, such as an antibody or a lectin. Certain viruses and bacteria also are capable of agglutinating blood cells. Many agglutinins, particularly the food lectins, are blood type specific. Certain foods clump only the cells of one blood type, but do not react with the cells of another type
Aggregate Cost	Total of all costs
Aggregation	A distribution of parasites amongst hosts is said to be aggregated, or overdispersed, if parasites are found to co-occur in particular hosts more often than if the parasites were distributed at random amongst all hosts. A more precise test would be if the distribution differed significantly from a Poisson distribution; a good heuristic is whether the variance to mean ratio is bigger than unity (in appropriate units). Macroparasites are typically aggregated in their host populations, so that the majority of hosts harbor few or no parasites while a few hosts harbor large parasite burdens. Aggregated distributions are often well described empirically by the negative binomial distribution
Agonal	A word used to describe a major negative change in a patient's condition, usually preceding immediate death, such as a complete cessation of breathing or a dire change in the patient's EEG or EKG
AGS	Gastric Cancer Cell
Ags	Antigens
AH	Acute Hepatitis
AIDS	Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
AIH	Autoimmune Hepatitis
Air Embolism	Blockage of an artery by air bubbles, which may have entered during surgery or after an injury
Airways	Passageways that air moves through while traveling in and out of the lungs during breathing
Alagille Syndrome	Hypoplasia of the hepatic ducts, congenital pulmonary artery stenosis, facial abnormalities, and other congenital malformations, particularly skeletal. It is often presented as jaundice during the neonatal period. It is an autosomal recessive disease generally manifesting during childhood
Alanine	Nonessential amino acid, alpha-aminopropanoic acid, occurring in proteins. High levels also occur free in plasma. It is synthesized from pyruvate and is used as a dietary supplement. An important source of energy for muscle tissue, the central nervous system and brain. Strengthens the immune system by producing antibodies, helps in the metabolism of sugars and organic acids
Albumin	Water-soluble blood protein. Increased absolute serum albumin content is not seen as a natural condition. Relative increase may occur in hemoconcentration. Absolute increase may occur artificially by infusion of hyperoncotic albumin suspensions. Decreased serum albumin is seen in states of decreased synthesis (malabsorption, malnutrition, liver disease, and other chronic diseases), increased loss (many GI conditions, nephrotic syndrome, thermal burns, etc.), and increased catabolism (cancer chemotherapy, thyrotoxicosis, familial hypoproteinemia, Cushing's disease) Globulin is increased disproportionately to albumin (decreasing the albumin/globulin ratio) in states characterized by chronic inflammation and in B-lymphocyte neoplasms, like myeloma and Waldenstrvm's macroglobulinemia. More relevant information concerning increased globulin may be obtained by serum protein electrophoresis. Decreased globulin may be seen in congenital or acquired hypogammaglobulinemic states. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis may help to better define the clinical problem <BR>
Albuminoid Liver|Amyloid Liver	A liver which is the seat of an albuminoid or amyloid degeneration; called also waxy liver
Albumins	Water-soluble proteins found in egg whites, blood, lymph, and other tissues and fluids. They coagulate upon heating
Alcohol Swab	Sterile, pre-packaged material treated with alcohol. Used to clean injection sites and injection/therapy equipment
Alcoholism	Disorder characterized by a pathological pattern of alcohol use that causes a serious impairment in social or occupational functioning. Chronic, excessive, and compulsive drinking
ALF	Acute Liver Failure, American Liver Foundation
Alfalfa	Medicago Sativa. Alfalfa can be taken as a capsule, tablet, tea or the dried plant itself. Perennial member of the family Fabaceae and is one of the most common, cultivated forage plants, being fed to animals either as hay or in a dehydrated form. Alfalfa grows on the side of the road and leaves a peculiar green haze and pungent smell in the air. Alfalfa is promoted as a detoxifier, said to cleanse the liver and bloodstream. Nutritious source of beta carotene, calcium, chlorophyll, and the vitamins D, E and K. Studies have noted a link between consumption of high doses of Alfalfa with the onset, or aggravation of, existing Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE). Those diagnosed with Lupus should avoid alfalfa products entirely
ALG	Antilymphocyte globulin
Algin	Good protection from many kinds of carcinogens, toxins and pollutants. Prevents living tissue from absorbing radioactive materials. Encourages the action of dietary fiber, by supplying nutrients, and by normalizing bowel functions
Alimentary	Digestion related, pertaining to food or nutritive material or to the organs of digestion
Alimentary Canal	Gastrointestinal (GI) tract
Alkaline Phosphatase	Increased serum alkaline phosphatase is seen in states of increased osteoblastic activity (hyperparathyroidism, osteomalacia, primary and metastatic neoplasms), hepatobiliary diseases characterized by some degree of intra- or extrahepatic cholestasis, and in sepsis, chronic inflammatory bowel disease, and thyrotoxicosis. Isoenzyme determination may help determine the organ/tissue responsible for an alkaline phosphatase elevation. Decreased serum alkaline phosphatase may not be clinically significant. However, decreased serum levels have been observed in hypothyroidism, scurvy, kwashiokor, achrondroplastic dwarfism, deposition of radioactive materials in bone, and in the rare genetic condition hypophosphatasia
Alkaloid	Any of a large class of nitrogen-containing organic compounds found especially in seed plants
Alkalosis	Dangerously decreased acidity of the blood, which can be caused by high altitudes, hyperventilation, and excessive vomiting
Alleles	Any alternative form of a gene that can occupy a certain chromosomal locus. In humans and other diploid organisms there are two alleles, one on each chromosome of a homologous pair
Allergen	Allergy-causing; irritant
Allergic Reaction	A sensitivity to a specific substance, called an allergen, that is contacted through the skin, lungs, swallowing, or injection
Allocation Ratio	Treatment allocation ratio. For example, 1:1 is equal allocation, 3:1 is 75% in one group, and 25% in the other
Almond	Prunus Amygdalus--Excellent emollient. May also help prevent heart disease. Shown to lower serum cholesterol levels in people who consumed it in place of saturated fat
ALOC	Abbreviation for Acute Loss Of Consciousness
Aloe Vera	Aloe Barbadensis. Herb often used to treat minor skin conditions, aloe vera or aloe gel is obtained from the inner layer of the leaf of the plant. Comes from the family Liliaceae, may be taken in capsule form or applied to the skin as a gel. Aloe Vera gel, derived from the mucilaginous cells contained inside the leaves, widely used in a variety of forms such as cosmetics, moisturizers, lotions, and shampoos. Aloe powder, is derived from the tough outer leaf of the plant, it is a strong cathartic consumed internally as a cleanser, and often used as a treatment for many conditions ranging from AIDS to liver disease
Alograft	(allogenetic graft or homograft)--A graft between two individuals who are of the same species (eg. human) but have genetic differences
Alpha Carotene	Carotenoid found in carrots and certain other vegetables. Its provitamin A activity is weaker than that of beta carotene. Studies have shown that several carotenoids other than beta carotene are potent antioxidants that provide profound health benefits. The scientific community has recognized the importance of natural mixed carotenoids including beta carotene
Alpha-Fetoprotein	A fetal blood protein present abnormally in adults with some forms of cancer, such as liver cancer<BR><I>¯ (alpha) Level</I>--The probability of a false positive result, or of rejecting the hypothesis of no treatment difference when there is no real difference or of a false positive. Also referred to as the probability of a type I error <BR><I>¯ (alpha) Spending Function</I>--A function or rule that governs how the total ¯ level or probability of a type I error can be spread out over the interim analysis. Limits the chance of a false positive result when trial data is looked at multiple times. Can be used to set up guidelines for trial monitoring <BR>
Alpha Tocopherol	Form of vitamin E
ALS	Antilymphocyte Serum
ALT|SGPT	formerly SGPT--Alanine aminotransferase - a protein which, when found in the blood in elevated quantities, generally indicates liver damage. It is found mainly in liver cells and therefore has greater specificity for liver disease, but it offers little other advantage. In most liver diseases, the AST increase is less than that of ALT (AST/ALT ratio is less than 1), except in alcohol-related liver injury where the ratio is usually more than 2. Many exceptions limit the practicality of the ratio. However, a ratio of more than 3 with an inordinate increase in GGT (more than 2 times the alkaline phosphatase) is highly suggestive. Increase of serum alanine aminotransferase is seen in any condition involving necrosis of hepatocytes, myocardial cells, erythrocytes, or skeletal muscle cells
Alterative	Vague term for an agent capable of favorably altering or changing unhealthy conditions of the body and tending to restore normal bodily function
Alternative Medicine	A broad range of healing philosophies, approaches, and therapies, alternative medicine is generally not taught in medical schools or used in hospitals. Also known as complementary medicine
Alum Root	Also known as Cranesbill Root. Strong Astringent used for passive bleeding, that occurs in hematuria, menorrhagia and hemotysis , has a potent healing effect on the entire gastrointestinal tract. Found to be active against tuberculosis bacteria. Used to curb irritation of hemorrhoidal tissue, reduce inflammation of mucous membranes, and to restore venous health
AMA	Against Medical Advice. American Medical Association
Amebiasis	An acute or chronic infection. Symptoms vary from mild diarrhea to frequent watery diarrhea and loss of water and fluids in the body
Amebic Abscess	A collection of pus in the liver caused by an intestinal parasite. An area of abscess formation (liquefaction necrosis) in the liver due to infection of the organ with ameba. Occurs mostly in the liver and brain. A specific purulent invasive lesion commonly of the liver caused by parasitic amebas
American Desert Herb	Used as a bronchial dilator and decongestant, and contains Cobalt, Copper, Nickel, Strontium and Vitamin B-12. Also used in the treatment of allergies, asthma, bladder, bursitis, colds, fevers, headaches, and kidney problems. Stimulates the nervous system and acts directly on the muscle cells
Amine	Organic compound containing nitrogen
Amino Acid	Building blocks from which proteins are made. Dietary amino acids are classified as essential or non-essential. Essential amino acids (histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan and valine) cannot be manufactured by the body and must be supplied in the diet or ill-health results. The non-essential amino acids are also essential for health, but can be synthesized in the body from the essential amino acids. Arginine, ornithine, cysteine, cystine, taurine and tyrosine are classified as non-essential amino acids but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. A suboptimal intake of the essential amino acids increases the body's need for the non-essential amino acids. When protein is broken down by digestion, the result is 22 known amino acids, 8 are essential amino acids, the rest are non-essential
Amino Acid Chloromethyl Ketones	Inhibitors of serine proteinases and sulfhydryl group-containing enzymes. They act as alkylating agents and are known to interfere in the translation process <BR>
Amino Acids, Branched-Chain|Amino Acids|branched-chain Amino Acids	Amino acids which have a branched carbon chain <BR>
Amino Acids, Cyclic|Amino Acids|Cyclic Amino Acids	Class of amino acids characterized by a closed ring structure
Aminobutyric Acids	Aliphatic four carbon acids substituted in any position(s) with amino group(s). Aminobutyric Acids are found in most living things. Most well known is GABA
Aminocaproic Acids	Group of compounds that are derivatives of aminohexanoic acids
Ammonia	Volatile, colorless, pungent alkaline gas, soluble in water, formed by the body as a product of protein metabolism; converted to urea by the liver or excreted by the kidney
AMP	Adenosine monophosphate - an energy storage molecule
Amphipathic	Of a molecule, having both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions. Can apply equally to small molecules, such as macromolecules and phospholipids and proteins
Ampulla of Vater	Location at which the common bile duct and pancreatic duct drain into theduodenum
Amylase	An enzyme produced in the pancreas and salivary glands. Elevation of the blood amylase is common in conditions of pancreatitis
Amyloid Liver,  Albuminoid Liver|Albuminoid Liver|Amyloid Liver	A liver which is the seat of an albuminoid or amyloid degeneration; called also waxy liver
Anabolic Processes	Conversion of small molecules into large
Anabolic Steroid	Drug similar to the male hormone testosterone that builds muscles and strengthens bones, but has adverse side effects
ANAbs	Antinuclear Antibodies
Analgesic	Agent that relieves pain without causing loss of consciousness
Analog, Analogue|Analog|Analogue	Analogue--A chemical compound with a structure similar to that of another but differing from it in respect to a certain component; it may have a similar or opposite action metabolically
Analogous	Similar
Analysis By Intention To Treat	A method of data analysis in which the primary tabulations and companion summaries of outcome data are by assigned treatment, regardless of treatment adherence
Analysis By Treatment Administered	A method of data analysis in which the primary tabulations and companion summaries of outcome data are by treatment administered, not be treatment assigned
Anaphrodisiac	Agent that lessens sexual function and desire
Anaphylactic Shock	Life-threatening allergic reaction resulting in difficulty breathing and low blood pressure
Anaphylaxis	An immediate, transient but life-threatening type of allergic reaction, characterized by relaxation of muscles not under voluntary control and by opening up of capillaries, the smallest branches of blood vessels, and resulting in plummeting of blood-pressure and generalized swelling of tissues
Anastomosis	Surgical formation of a passageway between any two spaces or hollow organs in the body
Ancillary Trial	An investigation, stimulated by the trial and intended to generate information of interest to the trial, designed and carried out by investigators from one or more of the centers in the trial and that utilizes resources of the trials (e.g., money, study patients, staff time, etc.), but that is not a required part of the design or data collection procedures of the main trial
Androgen	Any steroid hormone that increases male characteristics
Anecdotal Evidence	Evidence based on a single observation, such as the result of a certain treatment on a disease in one person. It is usually impossible to know if the given result would occur again under similar circumstances, or was a chance event. For this reason, anecdotal evidence should rarely form the basis of treatment recommendations
Anemia	Condition in which the number of red blood cells, the amount of hemoglobin, or the volume of packed red blood cells are less than normal
Anergic	Refers to the state of being so immunologically suppressed that one is unable to produce cutaneous delayed type hypersensitivity reaction (DTH). Such patients will usually not test positive for TB on a PPD (mantoux) test
Anesthesia	Loss of sensation in a certain part of the body or throughout the body
Anesthetic	Drugs or gases given to cause a loss of feeling. A general anesthetic puts the patient to sleep. A local anesthetic makes an area of the body numb
Aneurysm	Abnormal swelling of the wall of an artery, caused by a weakening in the vessel wall
Angelica	Angelica Archangelica--Similar to the Chinese herb Dong Quai. Used for the treatment for flatulence and stomach pains. Also used as a stimulant to invigorate circulation and warm the body. Promote menstrual flow and help regulate irregular menstrual cycles. Angelica should not be used by pregnant women or diabetics, has a tendency to elevate blood sugar levels
Angiodysplasia	Abnormal or enlarged blood vessels in the gastrointestinal tract
Angiogenesis	The process of forming new blood vessels. Angiogenesis is essential for the growth of tumors
Angiography	Imaging of a system of blood vessels after injection of a dye
Angioplasty	Reconstruction of a blood vessel
Angiosarcoma	Rare malignant tumor affecting particularly the liver, a cancer that arises from the cells that line the blood vessels
Angiotensinogen	A serum globulin formed by the liver that is cleaved by renin to produce angiotensin I
Anhidrosis	The abnormal absence of sweat
Anion Gap	Increased serum anion gap reflects the presence of unmeasured anions, as in uremia (sulfate, phosphate), diabetic ketoacidosis (acetoacetate, beta-hydroxybutyrate), shock, exercise-induced physiologic anaerobic glycolysis, fructose and phenformin administration (lactate), and poisoning by methanol (formate), ethylene glycol (oxalate), paraldehyde, and salicylates. Therapy with diuretics, penicillin, and carbenicillin may also elevate the anion gap. Decreased serum anion gap is seen in dilutional states and hyperviscosity syndromes associated with paraproteinemias. Because bromide is not distinguished from chloride in some methodologies, bromide intoxication may appear to produce a decreased anion gap <BR>
Anise	Used to ease intestinal colic and flatulence. also has an expectorant and anti-spasmodic action, may be used in cases of bronchitis, and where there is a persistent irritable cough. Has been used for whooping cough. Considered a carminative and stimulant <BR>
Anodyne	Agent that relieves or kills pain
Antacid	Drug that neutralizes stomach acids; used to treat indigestion, heartburn, and acid reflux
Antagonism	The opposite of synergy. One factor reduces or cancels the effect of another
Antenatal	Before the time of birth
Anterior	In front, or towards the front
Anthelmintic	Drug used to destroy or eliminate parasitic intestinal worms
Anti-HAA	Antibody to Hepatitis Associated Antigen
Anti-HAV	Antibody to Hepatitis A Virus
Anti-HBc	Antibody to the Hepatitis B Core Antigen. Test used to identify a past or present HBV infection. It is produced during and after acute HBV infection. The core antigen is part of the hepatitis B virus and the antibody to the core antigen is usually present in chronic carriers. If it is present with a positive anti-HBs (protective antibodies), then it is associated with recovery from an infection and this person is not a carrier. The interpretation of this test depends on the first two test results<BR>
Anti-HBe	Antibody to the Hepatitis B e Antigen<BR>
Anti-HBs	Antibody to the Hepatitis B Surface Antigen. The presence of antibodies indicates that a person has been exposed to HBV previously, but has successfully cleared the virus from their body and is no longer contagious. Antibodies are also produced from the HBV vaccine series <BR>
Anti-HBsAg	Antibody to Hepatitis B Virus
Anti-HCV	Antibody to the Hepatitis C Virus
Anti-HDV	Antibody to the Hepatitis D Virus <BR>
Anti-liver Cytosolic Protein 1	Associated with anti-liver/kidney microsomal 1 (anti-LKM1); considered a more specific marker of type 2 autoimmune hepatitis than anti-LKM1 <BR>
Antibiotic	A medication that is used to kill bacteria or inhibit their growth. Available in topical, oral, and injectable forms. Most oral antibiotics work best if taken on an empty stomach. Although occasionally antibiotics can irritate the stomach, mixing them with foods can impair absorption, thus effectiveness
Antibody	A protein secreted by cells of our immune system in response to infection. The antibody binds to an ‘enemy’ molecule, in this case, a specific part of the hepatitis C virus. This is meant to prevent the virus from infecting other cells or destroy it. As with other viral infections, the presence of antibodies does not necessarily mean a virus will be eliminated from the body. 2. A protein produced in the blood of vertebrates following exposure to an antigen. The antibody binds specifically to the antigen and thus stimulates its inactivation by other parts of the immune system. The major classes of antibody are immmunoglobulin A, or IgA, found predominantly in bodily secretions like saliva; IgM and IgG which are typically produced sequentially in response to microparasitic infections; and IgE which is often elevated in the response to helminth infections. Only IgG is able to cross the placenta to provide maternal immunity. The Good Guy <BR>
Antibody Dependent Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity-ADCC|ADCC|Antibody Dependent Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity	An immune response in which antibodies bind to target cells, identifying them for attack by the immune system
Antibody Presenting Cell|APC	APC--A white blood cell that devours foreign bodies, breaks them down, and carries characteristic antigen peptides to it's surface. The foreign antigen, complexed with MHC I or II is presented to CD4 or CD8 to initiate an immune response specific to that peptide
Antibody, Blocking|Blocking Antibody	An antibody that combines with an antigen without visible reaction but prevents another antibody from later combining with or producing its usual effect on that antigen
Anticholinergics	Medicines that calm muscle spasms in the intestine. A class of medicines affects the nerve cells or nerve fibers. Includes drugs for anxiety, depression, and nervousness
Anticoagulation	Therapeutic interference (&quotblood-thinning") with the clotting mechanism of the blood to prevent or treat thrombosis and embolism
Antidepressant, Tricyclic|Tricyclic Antidepressant	A particular class of medication which is prescribed for the medical treatment of clinical depression and associated disorders, including chronic pain syndrome
Antidiarrheal drug	Drug that helps to control diarrhea
Antidote	Drug that counteracts the effects of a poison
Antiemetic	Drug that relieves nausea and vomiting
Antigen	Anything introduced into the body that is seen as foreign. An antigen stimulates the immune system into producing cells that attack it. The Bad Guy <BR>
Antigenemia	The presence of detectable amounts of an antigen in the blood
Antigenic Drift	Several viruses mutate frequently in order to avoid destruction by the immune systems of their hosts. The gradual evolution of viral strains that results from these mutations is known as antigenic drift
Antigenicity	The ability of an antigen to combine with antibodies and T-cell receptors to invoke a reaction from the immune system <BR>
Antigens	Substances which are capable, under appropriate conditions, of inducing a specific immune response and of reacting with the products of that response, that is, with specific antibodies or specifically sensitized T-lymphocytes, or both. Antigens may be soluble substances, such as toxins and particulates, or foreign proteins, such as tissue cells and bacteria; however, only the portion of the protein or polysaccharide molecule known as the antigenic determinant combines with antibody or a specific receptor on a lymphocyte
Antihypertensives	Antihypertensives lower high blood pressure. Relaxes the blood vessels, which causes the blood to flow more easily
Antioxidants	Natural Biochemical Substance that protect against cell damage by guarding the cell from oxygen free radicals. Antioxidant nutrients include vitamins A, C, and E, L-glutathione, Beta Carotene, Pycnogenol (grape seed extract), Selenium, Superoxide Dismutase, Coenzyme Q-10, and Bioflavonoids. Plant antioxidants include Gingko Biloba and Garlic <BR>
Antipruritic	Itch treatment
Antipyretic	Compound that reduces fever
Antiretroviral	A substance, drug, or process that destroys a retrovirus, or suppresses it's replication
Antisense	Complementary: an antisense compound is the mirror image of the genetic sequence that it is suppose to inactivate
Antisense Strand	Most genetic material, both RNA and DNA, appears as two strands or chains of nucleotides wrapped together into a double helix - the common picture of DNA. Each nucleotide - A, T, C and G - has an attractive opposite . C attracts G, A attracts T. As a result, one strand, the &quotsense" strand, contains the information (for example, ATG-AAA) and the other strand, the antisense strand contains the opposite of this<BR>information (TAC-TTT - according to pairing rules). Antisense RNA is the &quotantisense" half of a complete double RNA strand. RNA viruses consist of 2 types - &quotsense" RNA viruses, whose genetic material consists of the &quotsense" half of a complete strand, and &quotantisense" RNA viruses, which have the &quotantisense" half. Sense RNA viruses can have their genetic material read out directly by the ribosomes of their host cells - antisense RNA viruses must first copy themselves into a &quotsense" strand of RNA
Antiseptic	Agent that inhibits the growth of microorganisms on living tissue
Antispasmodic	Drug used to ease or prevent muscular spasms or convulsions
Antiviral	Virus treatment. A substance, drug, or process which destroys a virus or suppresses its replication. Can apply to herpes or CMV
Antrectomy	Surgical procedure in which the portion of the stomach is removed that produces the hormones that cause acid secretion
Anus	Lower opening of the digestive tract through which feces (bowel movements) are discharged
AP	Abdominoperineal, Adenomatous Polyp, Appendectomy, Appendix
APC	Adenomatous Polyposis Coli, Antibody Presenting Cell
Aplasia	Complete or partial failure of any organ or tissue to grow
Aplastic Anemia	Severely reduced amount of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets
Apnea	Possibly life threatening condition in which breathing stops, for either a short or long period of time
Apoferritin	Colorless crystalline protein capable of storing iron in bodily cells especially of the liver by combining with iron to form ferritin
Apoplasmatic	Pertaining to substances that are produced by cells and form a constituent part of the tissues of an organism, such as fibers of connective tissue or the matrix of bone and cartilage
Apoplectic	Pertaining to, caused by, or affected with apoplexy
Apoplexy	Sudden neurologic impairment due to a cerebrovascular disorder, either an arterial occlusion or an intracranial hemorrhage. Copious extravasation of blood within any organ
Apoptosis	Developmental or programmed cell death characterized by membrane blobs, extensive chromatin condensation, and DNA fragmentation. Plays a role in negative selection of developing T cells and the killing of targets by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Cell suicide
Aposome	An inclusion within the cytoplasm that has been made by the activity of the cell itself
Apostasis	The end or crisis of an attack of disease
Apothecary	Pharmacist
APPY	Appendectomy
APR	Abdominal-Perineal Resection
Arbovirus	A virus which uses Arthropods as vectors and is transmitted in their saliva to the definitive host. i.e., yellow fever. Large a diverse group of viruses, taxonomically unrelated which are classically transmitted by arthropod vectors, e.g. mosquitoes, ticks, etc
ARC	AIDS Related Complex
ARD	Anorectal Dressing
ARDS	Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Arginase	Enzyme of the hydrolase class that catalyzes the reaction L-arginine + H2O = L-ornithine + urea. The enzyme also hydrolyzes canavanine. It is a Mn2+-bound protein, found principally in the liver. The reaction is part of the urea cycle. A deficiency of the enzyme, transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait, results in argininemia <BR>
Arginase Deficiency	An autosomal recessive aminoacidopathy involving the biosynthesis of urea; arginine is elevated in blood and urine and may cause secondary cystinuria; oroticaciduria is common, but hyperammonemia is rare. Signs include psychomotor retardation, hepatomegaly, and scalp discoloration. Also called Argininemia and Hyperargininemia
Arginine	Nonessential amino acid but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. May promote the release of growth hormone. Involved in creatine synthesis, a compound that stores energy in muscle. Promotes wound healing and regeneration of the liver; and is considered crucial for optimal muscle growth and tissue repair. Helps to remove ammonia from the body as part of the urea cycle. Arginine has improved immune responses to bacteria, viruses & tumor cells
Argininemia	Arginase Deficiency
Argyria	Also called Argyrosis. A permanent ashen-gray discoloration of the skin, conjunctiva, and internal organs that results from long-continued use of silver salts
ARI	Acute Respiratory Infection
Arildone	Chemical name: 4-[6-(2-chloro-4-methoxyphenoxy)hexyl]-3,5-heptanedione; an antiviral agent, C20H29ClO4 <BR>
Aristolochia	A genus of shrubs and herbs of many species, often actively medicinal. The plants contain aristolochic acid, a phenanthrene-carboxylic acid derivative, the major aromatic bitter principle. It is toxic to experimental animals in sufficient dosage, causing cardiac and respiratory arrest
Aristolochic Acid	The major bitter aromatic principle of herbs of the genus Aristolochia and related species, called also aristolochine
Aristolochine	Aristolochic Acid
Armature	A protective organ or structure
Arnica	Arnica Montana--Also known as Leopard's bane, Wolf's bane, and Mountain tobacco. Used primarily for external use. Also as a diuretic, diaphoretic, emollient, expectorant, vulnerary and stimulant. Used as a tincture or salve, it helps to promote the healing of bruises, wounds, and general irritation. Only very dilute solutions of tincture should be used, the tincture can cause inflammation and blistering when applied. The dilute tincture can be helpful in inflammation of the mouth and throat, some doctors have used itas a cardiac agent and for internal bleeding
Arogastralgia	Excessive air in the stomach
Aromine	A fragrant alkaloid from urine containing benzene derivatives
Arrest	The act of stopping
Arrheno	A combining form meaning male
Arrhigosis	Inability to perceive cold, absence of the cold sense
Arrhythmia	Any variation from the normal rhythm of the heartbeat; it may be an abnormality of either the rate, regularity, or site of impulse origin or the sequence of activation
Arteriography	Diagnostic procedure to detect disease in solid organs or blood vessels to diagnose and treat severe bleeding. A special dye injected into the blood vessels allows them to be seen on x-ray
Arteritis	Inflammation of the walls of an artery that causes the passageway to become narrower; can lead to tissue damage because oxygen is not properly supplied
Artery	Large blood vessel that carries oxygen in the blood from the heart to tissues and organs in the body
Arthralgia	Pain in a joint, pain not caused by inflammation but by other factors
Arthritis	Disease of the joints characterized by inflammation, pain, stiffness, and redness
Artichoke	Cynara Scolymus--Used for jaundice, dyspepsia, liver insufficiency, postoperative anemia and chronic albuminuria. Stimulates bile production and secretion, sluggish livers and digestive irregularities. Lowering cholesterol and triglyceride levels in the blood. Possesses some diuretic activity, helping with kidney disease and protein in the urine
Artificial Respiration/Ventilation|Artificial Respiration|Artificial Ventilation	Forcing of air (either by mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-nose) into the lungs of a person who has stopped breathing
AS	Anal Sphincter
ASA	Abbreviation for acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin)
Ascites	Accumulation of serous fluid in the peritoneal cavity, usually encountered wtih portal hypertension or heart failure. Uncomfortable accumulation of fluid causing abdominal swelling. This occurs when the blood flow through the liver is obstructed. Ascites often occurs with cirrhosis of the liver
Ascorbic Acid	Chemical term for vitamin C, water-soluble, white crystalline vitamin present in citrus fruits, tomatoes, berries, potatoes and fresh, green leafy vegetables. Essential for the formation of collagen and fibrous tissue for normal intercellular matrices in teeth, bone, cartilage, connective tissue and skin, and for the structural rdintegrity of capillary walls. Aids in fighting bacterial infections and interacts with other nutrients. High dietary Ascorbic Acid intake appears to protect against gastric cancer. This may be due to its action as a scavenger of reactive radical species formed in the gastric mucosa, resulting in a reduced level of radical-mediated DNA damage
Aseptic	Without the presence of disease causing microorganisms
ASGE	American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
ASLC	Acute Self Limited Colitis
Asparagus	Asparagus Officianalis--Used to promote fertility, reduce menstrual cramping, and increase milk production in nursing mothers. Contains compounds called steroid glycosides that directly affect hormone production. Excellent diuretic. High in folic acid, which is essential for the production of new red blood cells. Also soothes pain and swelling of joints due to rheumatism or arthritis. Do not use if your kidneys are inflamed, it increases the rate of urinary production
Aspartic Acid	Non-essential amino acid. Aids in the expulsion of harmful ammonia from the body. When ammonia enters the circulatory system, it acts as a highly toxic substance which can be harmful to the central nervous system. Studies have shown that it may increase endurance and increase resistance to fatigue
ASPD	Anterior Superior Pancreaticodudenal Artery
Asphyxia	Medical term for suffocation, which can be caused by choking on an object, by lack of oxygen in the air, or by chemicals such as carbon monoxide, which reduce the amount of oxygen in the blood
Assay	Analytical test
Assembly	The stage of replication during which all the structural components come together at one site in the cell and the basic structure of the virus particle is formed
AST|SGOT	formerly SGOT--Aspartate aminotransferase - a protein which, when found in the blood in elevated quantities, generally indicates liver damage. (although less specific for liver damage than ALT) present in the kidney ,brain, skeletal muscle, heart as well as the liver. AST levels also increase in muscle injury, MI, CNS disease, heart failure, and other nonhepatic disorders. Regardless of some nonspecificity, high levels indicate liver cell damage. Values of more than 500 IU/L suggest toxic or acute viral hepatitis. These high values also occur in heart failure (ischemic hepatitis) and with common duct stones. The high value of the numbers has no prognostic value and does not correlate with the degree of liver damage. AST is reliable and part of routine screening for liver disease. Serial testing provides good monitoring: A fall to normal indicates recovery unless associated with the end stages of massive hepatic necrosis. Increase of aspartate aminotransferase is seen in any condition involving necrosis of hepatocytes, myocardial cells, or skeletal muscle cells. Decreased serum AST is of no known clinical significance
Asthenia	Weakness, debilitation
Asthenic	Having little tone or strength, especially in regards the nervous system or the skeletal muscles
Astragalus Root	Astragalus Membranaceous. Astragalus has no known toxicity and is commonly known as Locoweed, Milk Vetch, Yellow Vetch, Chinese Astragalus and Huang Ch'i. In the family of peas and is a mild restorative and preventive plant. Astragalus is one of the most important Oriental tonic and health-promoting medicinal plants and is often used to increase resistance to disease and infections. Used as a diuretic, a vasodilator and as a treatment for respiratory infections. Replenishes vital energy, and may also reduce blood pressure by helping to rid the body of excess water weight. Given routinely to patients undergoing chemotherapy and radiation treatments. May also prevent the spread of malignant cancer cells to healthy tissue. Astragalus also increases interferon production and enhances NK and T cell function, increasing resistance to viral conditions such as hepatitis, AIDS and cancer
Astringent	Substance that causes contraction of tissues, checking the discharge of mucus and fluid from the body
Asymptomatic	Having no symptoms, no visible or recognizable symptoms. Many hepatitis patients will not exhibit any recognizable symptoms
Asymptomatic Infection	An infection or phase of infection, without symptoms
Asystole	A condition in which the heart no longer beats and usually cannot be restarted
AT	Abdominal Tympany
Ataxia	Problems with coordination or proper use of muscles
ATF	Abdominal Tumor Fluid
ATG	Antithymocyte Globulin
Atherosclerosis	Type of hardening of the arteries in which fat, cholesterol, and other blood components build up in the walls of the arteries. As atherosclerosis progresses, the arteries to the heart may narrow so that nutrients and oxygen rich blood have a difficult time reaching the heart muscle
ATN	Acute Tubular Necrosis
Atonic	Having diminished strength or poor tone
Atopic	A type of inherited allergic response involving elevated immunoglobulin E. Sometimes called a reagin response, it means that you have hay fever, bronchial asthma, or skin problems like urticaria or eczema. It can be acquired, sometimes after hepatitis or extended contact with solvents or alcohol
ATP	Adenosine Triphosphate, compound consisting of the nucleotide adenosine attached through its ribose group to three phosphoric acid molecules. It serves to store energy in muscles which is released when it is hydrolyzed to adenosine diphosphate
Atresia	Lack of a normal opening from the anus, esophagus, or intestines
Atrophic Gastritis	Chronic irritation of the stomach lining. Causes the stomach lining and glands to wither away
Atrophy	Wasting, Shrinkage or near disappearance of a tissue or organ
Atropine	An alkaloid derived from Belladonna (Atropa belladonna) and related plants that blocks some cholinergic or parasympathetic functions. Has been used to stop the cramps of diarrhea and is still found in some OTC cold remedies, since it dries up secretions. The main current medical use is in eye drops used to constrict the pupil
Attachment	The binding of a virus particle to a specific receptor on the surface of a host cell
Attenuated Virus	A weakened virus with reduced ability to infect or produce disease. Some vaccines are based on attenuated viruses
Atypical	Unusual
Aura	A "warning" signal that comes before a migraine headache or an epileptic seizure, which might include emotions or sensations of movement or discomfort
Auto	(prefix) Self
Autoagglutinin	An autologous serum factor with the property of agglutinating the individual's own cellular elements
Autoimmune	Caused by antibodies or T cells that attack molecules, cells, or tissues of the organism producing them
Autoimmune Disease	A disease process that involves the production of host antibodies to host tissue
Autoimmunity	Condition in which antibodies are produced against the body's own tissues
Autologous	Pertaining to the same organism or one of its parts; originating within an organism itself
Autolysis	Self-dissolution; the post-mortem enzymatic degradation of cells
Autopsy	Examination of a body following death, possibly to determine the cause of death or for research
Autosomal Dominant	Term describing a gene on any chromosome other than the sex chromosomes that produces its effect whenever it is present; can also describe the effect of the gene itself
Autosomal Recessive	Term used to describe a gene on any chromosome other than the sex chromosomes that produces its effect only when two copies of it are present; can also describe the effect of the gene itself
Autosplenectomy	The almost complete disappearance of the spleen through progressive fibrosis and shrinkage, such as may occur in sickle cell anemia
Autotherapy	The spontaneous cure of disease. Treatment of disease by filtrates from the patient's own secretions. Self-cure
Autothromboagglutinin	A platelet autoagglutinin
Auxiliary	Liver Transplantation--When only part of the liver is replaced and the rest of the native liver is not removed
AW	Actual Weight
Axilla	Armpit
Ayurveda or Ayurvedic Medicine|Ayurveda|Ayurvedic Medicine	A 5,000-year-old healing tradition from India that teaches how health is not only the absence of disease, but a state of harmonious and dynamic balance on all levels, mind, body, soul and environment. Ayurveda provides an integrated approach to preventing and treating illness through lifestyle changes and natural therapies. Ayurvedic theory states that all disease begins with an imbalance or stress in the individual's consciousness. Ayurvedic approach involves treating the whole person with diet, yoga and meditation and a blending of body, mind and spirit
Azotemia	Kidney failure. The abnormal presence of urinary waste products in the blood
B Bile	Bile from the gallbladder; samples are obtained by use of a duodenal tube after gallbladder contraction stimulation, usually with magnesium sulfate. It may occur despite absence of the gallbladder and contains up to 1 gram of bilirubin per 100 ml.
B Cell	White blood cell that makes antibodies to fight infections caused by foreign proteins. One of the two major types of lymphocytes (white blood cells, WBC), derived from bone marrow lymphocytes
B Complexes	Membrane stabilizers. Helps nerve functions. Natural tranquilizers, or anti-stress vitamins. B vitamins are water soluble. B complex must be taken with food already in the stomach. If taken on an empty stomach, pain and nausea are a common side effect. If the B complex is being absorbed effectively, the urine will be bright yellow and have a pungent smell due to the riboflavonoids present <BR>
B-Lymphocytes	B-lymphocytes are blood cells of the immune system derived from the bone marrow and spleen involved in the production of antibodies.
b, ß	Beta, the second letter of the Greek alphabet; symbol for the b chain of hemoglobin
b.d.	Abbreviation for L. bis di¢e, twice a day
b.i.d.	Abbreviation for L. bis in di¢e, twice a day
B.R.M.	Biological Response Modifier
BA	Bile Acid, Biliary Artresia, Bachelor of Arts Ba -Symbol for barium
ba	Symbol for barium <BR>
Bacillemia	The presence of bacilli in the blood
Bacillus	Bacteria
Bacteremia	Bacteria in the blood, condition may be dangerous for people with a weakened immune system or abnormal heart valves
Bacteria	Any of various one celled microorganisms of the plant kingdom, existing as free living organisms or as parasites of other organisms. Bacteria reproduces through subdivision. Bacteria is classified according to their behavior and shape. Group of micro-organisms that are a single cell approximately 1 micron in transverse diameter. Some bacteria cause disease in man, requiring treatment with an antibiotic
Bacterial Infection	Bacteria are group of micro-organisms that are a single cell approximately 1 micron in transverse diameter. Some bacteria cause disease in man, requiring treatment with an antibiotic
Bacterial Proteins	Proteins found in any species of bacterium
Bactericidal	Capable of killing bacteria
Bactericide	Anti-bacteria drug, Bactericide, Agent that destroys bacteria
Bacterin	Bacterial vaccine
Bacteriological	Bacteria study related
Bacteriological Specimen	Refers to any body fluid, secretion, or tissue sent to the laboratory where smears and cultures for bacteria will be performed. The specimen may consist of blood, sputum, urine, spinal fluid, material obtained at biopsy, etc
Bacteriophage	Very delicate bacterial virus with considerable variation in structure which may attack and destroy bacteria cells under certain conditions. Contains a protein coat and a nucleic acid core
Bacteriostatic	Antibiotic, term used to describe a substance that stops the growth of bacteria
Bacterium	Tiny, single-celled microorganism, commonly known as a germ; some bacteria, called pathogens, cause disease
Bactrim	Brand name of trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole
Bagging	Manual respiration for a patient having breathing trouble that uses a handheld squeeze bag attached to a face mask
Balloon	A sac that can be inserted into a body cavity or tube and distended with air or gas. To distend with air or gas, to inflate
Ballooning	Distending any cavity of the body with air or gas for therapeutic purposes
BAN	British Approved Name, an official nonproprietary name approved by the British Pharmacopoeia Commission
Band	An object or appliance that confines or restricts while allowing a limited or desired degree of movement. A strip that holds together or binds two or more separate objects
Band Cell	A variety of neutrophil which appears in the blood in states of acute bacterial infection
Banding	The act of encircling and binding with a thin strip of material
Bane	A poison. See Arnica
Banewort	Belladonna
Banti's Disease	A disorder characterized by congestion and great enlargement of the spleen usually accompanied by anemia, leukopenia, and cirrhosis of the liver
Barberry	Also known as Oregon Grape Root. Used in small doses, Barberry tonic is believed to be an effective treatment for heartburn, ulcers, stomach upset, and to stimulate the appetite. Herbal literature frequently recommends Barberry tinctures as a treatment for liver problems such as jaundice and hepatitis. Also considered effective in lowering blood pressure, reducing bronchial constriction, reducing heart rate and respiration, and as a palliative for menstrual irregularities. Also used as a topical antiseptic. Exhibits some antibacterial activity, accounting for its useas an antiseptic when applied to the skin. Also known to possess sedative qualities, and can act to stimulate the uterus and lower blood pressure
Barbital	The oldest of the barbiturates, a long-acting compound administered orally as a sedative and hypnotic. barbital sodium the soluble monosodium salt of barbital, having the same actions and uses as the base
Barbitone	British name for Barbital
Barbiturate	Any of a class of sedative-hypnotic agents derived from barbituric acid or thiobarbituric acid and classified into long-,intermediate-, short-, and ultrashort-acting classes. The ultrashort-acting barbiturates, e.g., thiopental, are used as intravenous anesthetics. The long-acting barbiturate phenobarbital is an important anticonvulsant used in the treatment of epilepsy. Many other barbiturates were widely used as sedatives or hypnotics, but benzodiazepines have replaced them in most uses. Some of these have a high potential for abuse and are Schedule II controlled substances. <BR>
Barbiturates	Group of sedative drugs that reduce activity in the brain;are habit-forming and are possibly fatal when taken with alcohol <BR>
Barium Enema	Lower gastrointestinal (GI) series. Diagnostic procedure in which x-rays are taken after barium sulfate is given to the patient by enema. The barium sulfate helps to outline the colon and rectum so that they can be seen clearly on x-rays <BR>
Barium Enema X-ray	Lower GI series
Barium Meal	Upper gastrointestinal (Gl) series. Diagnostic procedure in which x-rays are taken after the patient swallows barium sulfate. The barium sulfate helps to outline the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum so that they can be seen clearly on x-rays
Barium Meal	Upper GI series
Barium Solution	A liquid containing barium sulfate, which shows up on x-rays. It outlines organs of the body so they can be seen on x-ray film <BR>
Barium	Main ingredient of barium sulfate, given by mouth or rectum to patients undergoing tests in the barium studies. A pale yellowish, metallic element belonging to the alkaline earths, whose acid-soluble salts are poisonous
Barium	A chalky liquid used to coat the inside of organs so that they will show up on an x-ray <BR>
Barley Grass	Used for for stomach and duodenum disorders, and for pancreatitis, ideal anti-inflammatory substance. High in iron, calcium, all the essential amino acids, vitamin C, the flavonoids, vitamin B-12, many minerals, and enzymes
Barrett's Esophagus	A change in the cells of the tissue that lines the bottom of the esophagus. The esophagus may become irritated when the contents of the stomach back up (reflux). Reflux that happens often over a long period of time can lead to Barrett's esophagus
Barrier	An obstruction
Bary	A combining form meaning heavy or difficult
Basal	Pertaining to or situated near a base
Basal Metabolic Rate	Lowest rate that a person can possibly use energy and remain alive; at this rate, only absolutely necessary functions such as breathing are maintained
Baseline	An observation or value that represents the normal background level, or an initial level, of a measurable quantity; used for comparison with values representing response to experimental intervention or an environmental stimulus, usually implying that the baseline and response values refer to the same individual or system
Baseline Characteristic	A variable that is measured, observed, or assessed on a patient at or shortly before treatment assignment and the initiation of treatment
Baseline Data	The set of data collected on a specific patient or set of patients prior to randomization
Baseline Examination	An examination that is carried out as part of the baseline visit and that is designed to assess a patient's eligibility for enrollment into the trial and to produce required baseline data
Basil	Excellent remedy to stop vomiting
Basilic	Important or prominent
Basophil	A structure, cell, or other histologic element staining readily with basic dyes. 2. a granular leukocyte with an irregularly shaped, relatively pale-staining nucleus that is partially constricted into two lobes, and with cytoplasm that contains coarse, bluish-black granules of variable size. Basophils contain vasoactive amines, e.g., histamine and serotonin, which are released on appropriate stimulation <BR>
Basswood	The wood of the Linden tree. Long used in American folk medicine as a decoction of the wood, bark, or flowers for bile and liver disorders
Battery	Any set, series, or grouping of similar things, as a battery of tests. A set or series of cells which afford an electric current
Bayberry	Also known as Wax Myrtle and Candleberry. Used as a tonic and stimulant to help the body's defense against ailments such as flu, fever,coughs, colds, headache, and sore throat. Also considered an effective remedy for bloody stools, diarrhea, and heavy menstrual bleeding. Used as an astringent, helps to dry up and protect exposed membranes. Also prepared as a gargle for treatment for early symptoms of colds and sore throat. Often applied to the skin as poultice to treat boils and skin ulcers. In large doses it is considered an emetic agent to produce vomiting
BBT	Basal Body Temperature
BC	Biliary Colic
BCAA	Branched Chain Amino Acid
BCO	Biliary Cholesterol Output
BDL	Bile Duct Ligation
bDNA	(Branched DNA) Assay--One of two tests that reveal the presence in the bloodstream of very small quantities of DNA and RNA. i.e. RNA fragments from the hepatitis C virus. It is less sensitive than PCR
BE	Barium Enema
Bee Pollen	Has an anti-microbial effect. Effective for fighting depression, fatigue, colon disorders and cancer. Used it in the treatment of hay fever. Bee Pollen contains calcium, lipids, carbohydrates, iron, manganese, free amino acids, phosphorous, sodium, aluminum, magnesium, carotene, copper, potassium, pantothenic acid, thiamin, riboflavin, ascorbic acid (Vitamin C), vitamins D and E, enzymes, co-enzymes, nicotinic acid, xanthophyll, pigments, and sterols
Bee Propolis	Waxy substance collected by honey bees which contain phytotonizides. Excellent aid against bacterial infections. Stimulates the immune system. Stimulates phagocytosis. Used for inflammation of the mucous membranes of the mouth and throat, tonsillitis, halitosis, ulcers, dry cough, and acne. Highly complex mixture of balsams, waxes, oils, resins, and a small amount of pollen
Bee's Wax	Natural base for the preparation of salves and herbal ointments
Belladonna	The deadly nightshade, Atropa belladonna L. (Solanaceae), a perennial plant indigenous to central and southern Europe and cultivated in North America; it contains various anticholinergic alkaloids, including atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine, which are used medicinally. Ingestion of belladonna or its alkaloids can cause poisoning
Benadryl	Trademark for preparations of diphenhydramine hydrochloride. Sometimes given to relieve itching that is associated with Liver Disease
Bene	Well
Benign	Not malignant or cancerous. Won't spread to other parts of the body
Bernstein Test	Diagnostic procedure used to determine whether heartburn symptoms are caused by acid coming up from the stomach and irritating the esophagus. This test consists of dripping a mild acid, similar to stomach acid, through a tube that has been placed in the esophagus and waiting to see if discomfort develops
Berylliosis	Beryllium poisoning, usually involving the lungs and less often the skin, subcutaneous tissues, lymph nodes, liver, and other structures. Beryllium fumes, its oxide and salts, and finely divided dust all may cause a tissue reaction when inhaled or implanted in the skin. The acute form is basically a toxic or allergic pneumonitis sometimes accompanied by rhinitis, pharyngitis, and tracheobronchitis. The more common chronic form is characterized by the development of granulomas and a diffuse interstitial inflammatory reaction; the clinical and pathological findings may be indistinguishable from those of sarcoidosis
Beta Blocker	Type of drug used to treat high blood pressure and heart disorders by reducing the strength and rate of the pumping by the heart
Beta Carotene	Vitamin A--Pigment found in orange vegetables and fruits, which the body converts to vitamin A; possibly protects against cancer. Most abundant of the carotenoids. Beta carotene has strong provitamin A activity. Stronger antioxidant than vitamin A. Studies have shown that several carotenoids other than betacarotene are potent antioxidants that provide profound health benefits. The scientific community has recognized the importance of natural mixed carotenoids including beta carotene. Medical research shows that foods rich in Beta Carotene will help reduce the risk of lung cancer & certain oral cancers. Beta Carotene is Non Toxic. Deficiency of Beta Carotene may result in night blindness, increased susceptibility to infections, loss of smell & appetite, rough, dry, scaly skin, fatigue, lack of tearing, defective teeth, and inhibited gum growth
Betadine	Trade name for povidone-iodine, a preparation used as a surgical scrub that is available in liquid and aerosol forms
BEV	Bleeding Esophageal Varices
BF	Bile Flow
BFP	Biologic False Positive
Bias	Deviation of results from the truth or mechanisms leading to such deviation, e.g., analysis bias, confounding factors, measurement bias, selection bias, withdrawal bias, and others <BR>
Bias, Analysis|Analysis Bias|Bias	Deviation of results or inferences from the truth resulting from flaws in the analysis or interpretation of results <BR>
Bias, Confounding Factor|Bias|Confounding Factor|Confounding Factor Bias	A confounding factor is an variable which is related to one or more of the variables defined in a study. A confounding factor may (1) mask an actual association or (2) falsely demonstrate an apparent association between the study variables where no real association between them exists. i.e. Alcohol intake may appear to be positively associated with laryngeal cancer but the actual association may be with the confounding factor of cigarette smoking, i.e., people who drink alcohol may be at increased risk for laryngeal cancer because they may also smoke cigarettes. If confounding factors are not measured and considered, bias may result
Bias, Measurement Bias|Bias|Measurement Bias	Systematic measurement error. For example, a sphygmomanometer which is not correctly calibrated will produce biased blood pressure readings <BR>
Bias, Selection Bias|Bias|Selection Bias	Error due to differences in characteristics of those participants who are selected for a study as compared to those not selected <BR>
Bias, Withdrawal|Withdrawal Bias	Error due to specific characteristics of those participants who choose to withdraw from a study or become lost to follow up, as opposed to those who remain <BR>
Biaxin	Brand name of clarithromycin
Bib	Abbreviation for L. bi¢be, drink
Biduous	Lasting for two days, as a fever
BIL	Bilirubin
Bilateral	Two-sided
Bilayer	A membrane consisting of two molecular layers, such as the cell membrane or the envelope of some viruses
Bilberry	Vaccinium Corymbosum. Bilberry is a perennial shrub that has long been used throughout Holland, Germany and Scandinavia for its health promoting effects. Numerous clinical studies have shown that bilberry contains active ingredients which affect proper eye function. Bilberries are particularly rich in the red pigment antioxidants called anthocyanosides. Studies revealed that the anthocyanosides bind to capillaries, which are found extensively in the eyes and help maintain their integrity, reduce their fragility and promote their repair. Reduces general eye strain and enhances vision in low light conditions. Bilberry fruit extract also possesses strong antiviral and antibacterial activity
Bile	Yellowish, brown, or green fluid made by the liver; in the small intestine, it aids in digestion, function is to remove waste from the liver and break down fats as food is digested. 2. Fluid secreted by the liver and poured into the small intestine via the bile ducts. Important constituents are conjugated bile salts, cholesterol, phospholipid, bilirubin diglucuronide, and electrolytes. Bile is alkaline due to its bicarbonate content, golden brown to greenish yellow in color, and has a bitter taste. Hepatic bile secreted by the liver, is concentrated in the gallbladder. Its formation depends on active secretion by liver cells into the bile canaliculi. Excretion of bile salts by liver cells and secretion of bicarbonate rich fluid by ductular cells in response to secretin are the major factors which normally determine the volume of secretion. Conjugated bile salts and phospholipid normally dissolve cholesterol in a mixed micellar solution. In the upper small intestine, bile is in part responsible for alkalinizing the intestinal content, and conjugated bile salts play an essential role in fat absorption by dissolving the products of fat digestion (fatty acids and monoglycerides) in water soluble micelles. Called also gall
Bile Acid Sequestrants	One type of cholesterol lowering medication, including colestipol and cholestyramine. Sequestrants bind with cholesterol containing bile acids in the intestine and remove them in bowel movements
Bile Acids and Salts	Steroid acids and salts. The primary bile acids are derived from cholesterol in the liver and usually conjugated with glycine or taurine. The secondary bile acids are further modified by bacteria in the intestine. They play an important role in the digestion and absorption of fat. Have been used pharmacologically, especially in the treatment of gallstones
Bile Canaliculi	Minute intercellular channels that occur between liver cells and carry bile towards interlobar bile ducts. Also called Bile Capillaries. Fine tubular canals running between liver cells, throughout the parenchyma, usually occurring singly between each adjacent pair of cells, and forming a three-dimensional network of polyhedral meshes, with a single cell in each mesh
Bile Capillaries	See Bile Canaliculi
Bile Duct	A duct by which bile passes from the liver or gallbladder to the duodenum
Bile Duct-Common	The extrahepatic bile duct formed by the junction of the hepatic and cystic ducts. It is part of the excretory apparatus of the liver <BR>
Bile Duct Obstruction|Extrahepatic	Impairment of bile flow through the hepatic, cystic, or common bile ducts or Vater's ampulla. Sometimes called surgical jaundice
Bile Duct Stricture	Abnormal narrowing of the common bile duct. A potential cause for biliary obstruction. Risk factors are gallstones, pancreatitis, prior surgery, and trauma. Symptoms include abdominal pain, chills, fever, and jaundice
Bile Ducts	Any of the ducts that convey bile in and from the liver; called also biliary ducts and gall ducts
Bile Ductule	The biliary channel linking the canal of Hering to the terminal bile duct within the terminal portal tract
Bile Fluke	Chinese Liver Fluke
Bile Leak	A hole in the bile-duct system that causes bile to spill into the abdominal cavity
Bile Nephrosis	Acute renal failure occurring in a patient with liver failure. Exact cause is unclear, but those with alcoholic hepatitis and alcoholic cirrhosis are at greatest risk. Symptoms include abdominal swelling, confusion, decreased or absent urine production, delirium, jaundice, nausea and vomiting. Prognosis is poor
Bile Peritonitis	Inflammation of the peritoneum which is caused by the escape of bile into the peritoneal cavity
Bile Reflux	Reflux of bile mainly into the upper digestive tract, but also into the pancreas
Bile Salt	Amphipathic compounds that aid digestion and lipid absorption, derived from steroids and have some detergent properties
Bile Vessel	Any of numerous fine channels within the liver that conduct bile
Bili	A combining form denoting relationship to the bile
Biliary|of Vomiting	Yellow or green coloration, due to the presence of bile produced by the liver
Biliary Apparatus	The parts concerned in the formation, conduction, and storage of bile, including the secreting cells of the liver, bile ducts, and gallbladder
Biliary Atresia	Congenital condition in which bile from the liver cannot reach the intestine because the bile ducts have developed poorly or not at all
Biliary Cirrhosis	Rare form of liver disease which results in the irreversible destruction of the liver and bile ducts. The cause is unknown, but is thought to be an autoimmune mechanism. Cirrhosis of the liver due to inflammation or obstruction of the bile ducts resulting in the accumulation of bile in and functional impairment of the liver
Biliary Cirrhosis of Children	Secondary biliary cirrhosis due to congenital atresia of the bile ducts; called also infantile liver
Biliary Cirrhotic Liver	One in which the bile ducts are clogged and distended, the substance of the organ being inflamed; due to biliary cirrhosis
Biliary Colic	Severe pain in the upper right section of the abdomen, usually caused by a gallstone passing out of the bladder or through the bile ducts
Biliary Endoprosthesis	A tube inserted into a blocked or narrowed bile duct to improve bile flow
Biliary Fistula	Abnormal passage communicating with the biliary tract
Biliary Obstruction	Blockage of the bile ducts can occur by bile duct cysts, bile duct inflammation, bile duct stricture pancreas (pancreatic tumor or swelling), stone, trauma, tumor, or enlarged lymph nodes. When bile duct obstruction occurs, bile accumulates in the liver and jaundice develops due to the accumulation of bilirubin in the bloodstream
Biliary Peritonitis	Inflammation of the peritoneum which is caused by the escape of bile into the peritoneal cavity
Biliary Scan	Test that uses a radioactive dye to look for bile duct obstruction or gallbladder inflammation. A special dye is injected into a vein that tends to collect mainly in the liver. It is then excreted in the bile where it makes its way to the gallbladder. A gamma camera measures the dye and generates an image of the biliary system and gallbladder
Biliary Stenosis	Narrowing or constriction of a bile duct
Biliary Stricture	A narrowing of the biliary tract from scar tissue. The scar tissue may result from injury, disease, pancreatitis, infection, or gallstones
Biliary Tract	System of organs and ducts through which bile is made and transported from the liver to the small intestine. Organs, ducts, and other structures that participate in the secretion, storage, and delivery of bile into the duodenum. Biliary tract refers to the bile ducts within the liver, the common bile duct (connecting the liver and gallbladder to the small intestine) and the cystic duct (short duct that connects the common bile duct to the gallbladder)
Biliary Tree	All passageways inside and outside the liver that carry bile to the intestines
Biliation	Production and excretion of bile
Bilidigestive	Pertaining to the gallbladder and digestive tract
Bilifuscin	Brownish green pigment found in old bile and human gallstones. Derivative of bilirubin
Biligenesis	The production or formation of bile
Biligenetic	Pertaining to biligenesis. Biligenic
Biligenic	Producing bile
Bilihumin	An insoluble ingredient of gallstones
Bilin	Name applied to the amorphous or crystalline mass obtained from bile by the action of ether and alcohol. It is composed of a mixture of the sodium salts of the bile acids
Bilinear	Of, pertaining to, or included by, two lines; as, bilinear coordinates
Bilious	Of or relating to bile. Marked by or affected with disordered liver function and especially excessive secretion of bile
Biliousness	Asymptom complex comprising nausea, abdominal discomfort, headache, and constipation, formerly attributed to excessive secretion of bile
Biliprasin	A green pigment from gallstones
Bilipurpurin	A purple pigment, occurring in the bile of ruminants; derived from chlorophyll
Bilirubin	Orange-yellow pigment in bile, causing jaundice if it builds up in the blood and skin; the levels of bilirubin in the blood are used to diagnose liver disease. Serum total bilirubin is increased in hepatocellular damage (infectious hepatitis, alcoholic and other toxic hepatopathy, neoplasms), intra- and extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction, intravascular and extravascular hemolysis, physiologic
Bilirubinate	A salt of bilirubin
Bilirubinemia	The presence of bilirubin in the blood; see hyperbilirubinemia
Bilirubinic	Pertaining to bilirubin
Bilirubinuria	Presence of bilirubin in the urine
Bilis	Bile
Biliuria	The presence of bile pigments in the urine
Biliverdin	Green pigment that occurs in bile and is an intermediate in the degradation of hemoglobin heme groups to bilirubin. It transforms into the red/orange bile pigment bilirubin
Bilobate	Having two lobes
Bilobular	Having two lobules
Bilobulate	Bilobular
Biloma	An encapsulated collection of bile in the peritoneal cavity
Binary Outcome Measure	An outcome measure that can assume only one of two values, such as in a trial with death as the outcome measure
Binding	Ability to constipate
Bio	Combining form denoting relationship to life, or to living organisms
Bioactive	Having an effect on or eliciting a response from living tissue
Bioavailability	Effectiveness. The degree to which a drug or other substance becomes available to the target tissue after administration
Biocatalyst	Enzyme
Biochemicals	Chemicals from which living organisms are made
Biodegradation	Series of processes by which living organisms degrade pollutant chemicals, pesticides, organic wastes, and implantable materials
Bioengineering	Use of engineering principles to solve biomedical problems. i.e. Creating chemicals or drugs that do not occur naturally. Also known as genetic engineering
Biofeedback	Technique used to gain control over a function that is normally automatic (such as blood pressure or pulse rate); the function is monitored and relaxation techniques are used to change it to a desired level
Bioflavonoid	Any of a group of colored flavones found in many fruits which aid in the absorption and metabolism of ascorbic acid. Bioflavonoids are needed for the maintenance of collagen and capillary walls and may aid in protection against infection
Biological Factors	are compounds with biological or physiological activity made by living organisms
Biological Products	Complex pharmaceutical substances, preparations, or agents of organic origin, usually obtained by biological methods or assay, that depend for their action on the processes affecting immunity. They are used especially in diagnosis and treatment of disease (as vaccines or pollen extracts) Biological products are differentiated from Biological Factors in that the Biological Factors are compounds with biological or physiological activity made by living organisms
Biological Response Modifiers	BRMs--Substances, either natural or synthesized, that boost, direct, or restore normal immune defenses. BRMs include interferons, interleukins, thymic hormones, and monoclonal antibodies
Biological Therapy	Treatment with substances called biological response modifiers that can stimulate the immune system to fight disease more effectively. Also called immunotherapy
Biological Warfare	The deliberate spreading of disease amongst humans, animals, and plants. Diseases are caused when small numbers of living
Biopsy|Needle Aspiration	Needle biopsy in which tissue is removed by aspiration into a syringe
Biotechnology	The use of living organisms or their products to make or modify a substance. These include recombinant DNA techniques (genetic engineering) and hybridoma technology
Biotin	Essential coenzyme that assists in the making of fatty acids and in the burning of carbohydrates and fats for body heat and energy. Also essential for function of red blood cells and hemoglobin synthesis. Helps in the utilization of Pantothenic acid, Folic acid, Protein, and Vitamin
Birch Bark	Betula Alba--Also known as canoe birch, paper birch and white birch. Used as an astringent, diaphoretic and diuretic. Used as bath additive for chronic or severe skin problems. Problems sleeping, a decoction can be used before going to bed as a mild sedative
Bismuth Subsalicylate	Nonprescription medicine such as Pepto-Bismol. Used to treat diarrhea, heartburn, indigestion, and nausea. It is also part of the treatment for ulcers caused by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori
Bitter Root	Apocynum Androsaemifolium--Also known as Dogsbane, Milkweed and Flytrap. Also been called Vegetable Trocar. One of the digitalis group of cardiac tonics, Apocynum, is the most powerful in slowing the pulse, strong action on the vaso-motor system. An irritant to mucous membranes, can cause catharsis and nausea. Helpful in dropsy's due to heart-failure, and ascites of hepatic cirrhosis. Used as an alterative in scrofula, rheumatism, and syphilis. Absorption in the gastro-intestinal tract being very irregular. Use with Caution!
Black Birch	Betula Lenta--Also known as Cherry Birch, Mahogany Birch, Mountain Mahogany, Spice Birch, and Sweet Birch. Tea made from Black Birch is used for urinary problems, and intestinal worms. When taken internally it is good for treating boils,diarrhea, and rheumatism. Also used as an astringent, anthelmintic, and diuretic
Black Cohosh	Cimicifuga Racemosa--Also known as Bugbane, Bugwort, Black Snakeroot and Squawroot. Used to treat asthma, bronchial spasms, bronchitis, whooping coughfatigue, rheumatism, neuralgia, sore throat, stimulate menstrual flow, ease the pain of childbirth, and relief from the symptoms of menopause. Antispasmodic for muscle pains and cramps. Also used for anxiety and nervousness, cough suppressant and expectorant, a diaphoretic for eliminating toxins. Contains compounds that support its uses as an anti-inflammatory agent and sedative. Consuming large doses can cause dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. Pregnant women should only use Black Cohosh under the supervision of their health care provider, Black Cohosh has been known for stimulating the uterus to speed childbirth, large doses could lead to premature birth
Black Haw	Known as a uterine tonic. Used for menstrual cramps. Black Haw contains salicin, a pain reliever much like aspirin. Helps to relieve head pain and reduce fever. Do Not take if you are pregnant. Never give to children under the age of 16 suffering from fevers, flu or chicken pox. Discontinue use if you get an upset stomach, or experience ringing in your ears
Black Thistle	Used to treat liver disorders, and regulate the menstrual cycle. Said to improve memory by increasing oxygen to the brain through improved circulation
Black Walnut	Juglans Nigra--Used to balance sugar levels and burn up excessive toxins and fatty materials. Helps relieve constipation, useful against parasitic and fungal infections, eliminate warts. Helps to promote bowel regularity and acts an antiparasitic. The extract is reputed to be beneficial for herpes, eczema, skin parasites and psoriasis when rubbed onto the skin. Has been known to kill ringworm and tapeworm
Bladder	Organ located in the pelvis whose function is to collect and store urine until it is expelled
Bladderwrack	Bladderwack--Natural source of Iodine. Anti-inflammatory
BLEO	Bleomycin Sulfate
Blessed Thistle	Also known as Holy Thistle, Marian, Holy Thistle, Our Lady's Thistle, and St. Mary's. Do not confuse this with Milk Thistle. Used as an appetite stimulant, to treat constipation and flatulence. Blessed Thistle tea is used for treating a variety of liver problems, such as hepatitis and jaundice. Blessed Thistle can lead to nausea and vomiting if taken in excess
Blind	A condition imposed on an individual (or group of individuals) for the purpose of keeping that individual or group of individuals from knowing or learning of some fact or observation, such as treatment assignment. Also called a "mask"
Blinded	The condition of having a blind in place, e.g., as in a single-
Bloating	Feeling of fullness in the abdomen, often occurring after meals
Block	A group, quantity, section, or segment that is considered as a unit for some purpose, procedure, process, or action. 2. (clinical trials) Treatment block. Analyses are conducted for each block, and then combined over blocks
Block Size	The number of individual elements making up a block. Treatment block size
Blocking	The process of establishing defined groups, as in a treatment allocation schedule designed to ensure a specific allocation ratio
Blood	Considered a circulating "tissue" composed of a fluid portion (plasma) with suspended formed elements (red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets); blood (arterial blood) is the means by which oxygen and nutrients are transported to tissues; [venous blood] is the means by which carbon dioxide and metabolic by-products are transported for excretion
Blood & Blood Products	Components of blood including red cells, platelets and plasma which are separated out by blood banks. Plasma is processed and purified to produce specific medical purposes, eg. Factor VIII
Blood Bactericidal Activity	Native bactericidal property of blood due to normally occurring antibacterial substances such as beta lysin, leukin
Blood Borne Substances	Substances that are present in the blood and are carried throughout the body
Blood Borne Viruses	Any virus which may be transmitted through the parenteral route
Blood Brain Barrier	A selective barrier between brain blood vessels and brain tissues whose effect is to restrict what may pass from the blood into the brain. Certain compounds readily cross the blood brain barrier. Others are completely blocked
Blood Cholesterol	Cholesterol that is manufactured in the liver and absorbed from the food we eat and is carried in the blood for use by all parts of the body. High levels of blood cholesterol lead to coronary heart disease and atherosclerosis
Blood Clot	Semisolid mass of blood that forms to help seal and prevent bleeding from a damaged vessel
Blood Cultures	Samples of blood tested for the presence of
Blood Gases	The content of oxygen, carbon dioxide and associated biochemical components in a sample of blood, usually arterial
Blood Pressure	A measure of how well blood circulates through your arteries, listen in the format of the systolic pressure over the diastolic pressure. Normal blood pressure is about 120/80
Blood Root	Also known as Indian Plant, Indian Paint, Indian Red Paint, Red Paint Root, Red Puccoon, Red Root, Pauson, Sanguinaria, and Tetterwort. Has been used for for treatment of skin cancers, and also for eczema, sores, warts, as well as other dermal & epidermal problems as a topical preparations. Used internally in herbal preparations for emphysema, chronic bronchitis and congestive lung conditions. Also used as a diuretic, expectorant, emetic, febrifuge, emmenagogue, tonic and stimulant
Blood Sugar	Carbohydrate, mainly glucose, of the blood
Blood Swab	A blood sample taken with a cotton-tipped stick
Blood Transfusion	Introduction of new matching blood into the bloodstream. The process of infusing blood products into a patient to raise the individuals concentration of red blood cells. Blood is typed (A, B, O, or AB) and crossmatched (mixed together to see if its compatible) prior to transfusion
Blood Type	Category used to describe a person's blood according to the kinds of proteins present on the surface of the red blood cells
Blood Urea Nitrogen	A waste-product in the blood and urine, measurement of which provides a measure of kidney function or dehydration
Blood Viscosity	Internal resistance of the blood to shear forces. The in vitro measure of whole blood viscosity is of limited clinical utility because it bears little relationship to the actual viscosity within the circulation, but an increase in the viscosity of circulating blood can contribute to morbidity in patients suffering from disorders such as sickle cell anemia and polycythemia
BLQ	Both Lower Quadrants
BLS	Blind Loop Syndrome, Basic Life Support
Blue Cohosh	Caulophyllum Thalictroides--Also known as Squaw Root and Papoose Root. Used as a diuretic to remove excess fluids, an expectorant to treat congestion, and a diaphoretic to eliminate toxins by inducing sweating. Stimulates intestinal activity, raises respiration, and elevates blood pressure. Stimulates uterine contractions and induces childbirth. Should not be used by expectant mothers except during the last month of pregnancy, under the guidance of an experienced herbalist or your health care provider
Blue Flag	Used for treating hepatic congestion due to venous or lymphatic stasis. Specific indications include rheumatic conditions, and chronic hepatitis ,scrophulous skin conditions, (apparently aids skin healing by working through the liver) herpes, eczema, psoriasis, uterine fibroids and enlarged thyroid gland
Blue Vervain	Also Known as American Vervain, False Vervain, Vervain, Simpler's Joy, Indian Hyssop, Wild Hyssop, Traveler's Joy, and Purvain. Known as a natural tranquilizer. Used for insomnia, nervous disorders, elimination of intestinal worms, expectorant, diaphoretic, antiperiodic, tonic, emetic, vulnerary and vermifuge. Used externally heals wounds and sores
BM	Basal Metabolism, Bowel Movement
BMP	Bone Morphogenetic Protein
BMR	Basal Metabolic Rate
BMT	Bone Marrow Transplant
BNO	Bowels Not Open
BO	Bowel, Bowel Obstruction, Bowel Open
Body Fluids	Liquid components of living organisms
Bolus	Large amount at once. A large dose of a drug that is given (usually intravenously) at the beginning of treatment to raise blood-level concentrations to a therapeutic level
Bone Marrow	Soft tissue located in the cavities of the bones where blood cells are formed, including erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets
Boneset	Used for treating the symptoms that accompany influenza. Used to help clear the upper respiratory tract of mucous congestion
Booster	Additional dose of a vaccine taken after the first dose to maintain or renew the first one
BOR	Bowels Open Regularly
Borage	Used for for reducing fever and for restoring vitality while recovering from illness, recommended for peritonitis and pleurisy for its
Borborygmi	Rumbling sounds caused by gas moving through the intestines (also called stomach "growling")
Boron	Mineral that may play a role in maintaining strong bones, affecting calcium and magnesium metabolism and proper membrane function
Boron Protenate	Critical for normal cell function and certain enzyme functions. Necessary ultratrace mineral for building healthy bones and cell membranes
Bounceback	A patient who returns to the ER with the same complaint shortly after being released
Bowel	Collective name for both small and large intestines
Bowel Disimpaction	Manual removal of impacted fecal matter from a patient's rectum
BP	Blood Pressure
BPC	Bile Phospholipid Concentration
bpm	Beats per minute
BPO	Bile Phospholipid Output
BPR	Blood Per Rectum
BR	Bowel Rest
Bradycardia	Slow heart rate, usually below 60 beats per minute in adults
Brain Death	When the brain has permanently stopped working, as determined by a neurological surgeon, artificial support systems may maintain functions such as heartbeat and respiration for a few days
Brazilian Guarana	Astringent and strong stimulant. Increases physical endurance and stamina. High caffeine content
BRB	Bright Red Blood
BRBPR	Bright Red Blood Per Rectum
Breath Tests	Any tests done on exhaled air
BRIC	Benign Recurrent Intrahepatic Cholestasis
Brigham Tea	Ma-Huang--Also known as Mormon tea. High in copper and iron, used to treat anemia. Also used for asthma, allergies, bronchitis, coughs, hayfever, congestive conditions, arthritis, fluid retention, colds, flu. Should not be used by those with severe hypertension, hyperthyroidism, glaucoma, coronary thrombosis, prostate enlargement, or anyone using MAOI
Brimstone Liver	An enlarged liver of a deep-yellow color, seen in some cases of congenital syphilis
Broccoli	Important source of Vitamin K, helps prevent stomach and colon cancer. High in fiber, vitamins C and K, and provitamin A carotenoids. Detoxifys carcinogens and helps to flush them out of the system
Bromelain	Helps inhibit pro-inflammatory compounds, similar to
Bromsulphalein	Used for a dye derived from phenolphthalein that is used in the form of its bitter white crystalline disodium salt in a liver function test
Bronchi	Air passages that lead from the windpipe to the lungs
Bronchiolitis	Infection caused by a virus in the bronchioles (the smallest airways in the lungs), mainly affecting young children
Bronchodilator	Drug that widens the airways in the lungs to improve breathing and to relieve muscle contraction or buildup of mucus
Bronchospasm	Temporary narrowing of the airways in the lungs, either as a result of muscle contraction or inflammation; may be caused by asthma, infection, lung disease, or an allergic reaction
Bronze Liver	The bronze-colored liver seen in malaria, which results from deposition of malarial pigment
Bruise	Injury, that does not break the surface of the skin but, ruptures small blood vessels near the surface, causes blood to flow into the tissues, which results in discoloration
BS	Bile Salt
BSA	Bile Sounds Active. Body Surface Area
BSC	Bile Salt Concentration
BSM	Bile Salt Metabolism
BSN	Bowel Sounds Normal
BSNA	Bowel Sounds Normal and Active
BSO	Bile Salt Output
BSR	Bowel Sounds Regular
BSSL	Bile Salt--Stipulated Lipase
BT	Bowel Tones
BTP	Biliary Tract Pain
Buchu	Agathosma Betulina--Used as an antiseptic and diuretic. Inflammation of the urethra, blood in the urine, bladder infections, chronic urinary tract disorders, kidney stones, cystitis, and rheumatism. Completely ineffective in treating sexually transmitted diseases
Buckthorn	Also known as Purging Buckthorn. Laxitive. Buckthorn stimulates the colonic muscle. Can cause severe abdominal pain and diarrhea. Use Buckthorn only as a last resort!
Budd	Chiari Syndrome--Rare disease characterized by occlusion of hepatic veins, usually accompanied by ascites, hepatomegaly, and pain in abdomen.Caval venogram provided delineation of caval webs and occluded hepatic veins. Percutaneous liver biosy may aid in revealing central lobular congestion. As the diseases progresses, bleeding varices and hepatic coma may develop
Budding	Cells constantly sample their outside environment, taking in substances from outside of the cell, as well as releasing substances to the external environment by doing this, cells can communicate with one another to form complex organisms. This is typically accomplished through budding: the cell membrane bends inward or outward and closes in upon itself, forming a "bubble" of membrane for the transport of substances. Many viruses use this mechanism as a method of entry and exit from a host cell. They are carried into the cell when it buds inward, and released when it buds outward. Many viruses retain the "bubble" of cell membrane (lipid), creating a protective lipid envelope for themselves . Thus these viruses development is completed as they are released from the cell and at the same time given their lipid envelope
Bugleweed	Used as a astringent, diuretic, nervine, peripheral
BUN	Blood Urea Nitrogen. Creatinine Ratio BUN:creatinine ratio is usually 20:1 in prerenal and postrenal azotemi
BUQ	Both Upper Quadrants
Burdock Root	Arctium Minus. Arctium Lappa. Burdock is a large, coarse herb that grows only at a certain time of year and has hooked bracts or burs which adhere to clothing or animal fur. This root has been used to treat various skin conditions such as acne and psoriasis. Burdock seeds are crushed to make a popular tincture used to purify the blood, to treat gout and ulcers, arthritis, rheumatism. Effective as a diaphoretic, used to induce sweating to help in neutralizing and eliminating toxins from the body. Widely utilized by herbal practitioner's in the treatment of gallstones, liver problems, flu, and to support the kidneys in filtering acids from the blood stream
Butcher's Broom	Ruscus Aculeatus. Distinguishable yellow flowers and is found in the Pacific Northwest. Also known as Box Holly or Knee Holly, butcher's broom is a short evergreen shrub from the family Liliaceae. The herb has been made in capsule or tablet form to treat circulatory problems of the legs and as an ointment or suppository to relieve the symptoms of hemorrhoids. Drank as a mildly bitter tea it is used to increase circulation to the limbs and acts to reduce the incidence of post-surgical blood clotting and thrombosis, to reduce swelling of the legs, believed to be useful in the treatment of phlebitis and varicose veins. When applied as a topical ointment, helps to ease the swelling and pains of rheumatism and arthritis. As well as menstrual problems and symptoms associated with the use of estrogen and pregnancy related cramps. May cause blood pressure to rise
Butternut Bark	Also known as White Walnut. Used for treatment of liver disorders and intestinal sickness. Safe and effective laxative. Used to expel worms during the course of laxative induced cleansing of the body
BW	Body Weight
Bypass	Shunt, operation in which a surgeon creates a new pathway for the movement of substances in the body
C	Celsius; Centigrade; Complement <BR>
C Bile	Hepatic bile; it is obtained from a duodenal drainage tube after the gallbladder has been emptied <BR>
C-reactive Protein	Blood test is used as an indicator of acute inflammation. C-reactive Protein is a protein of the pentraxin family, produced by the liver during periods of inflammation and detectable in serum in various disease conditions particularly during the acute phase of immune response. Normally C-reactive protein should be negative in the bloodstream. Conditions which can cause a positive C-reactive protein include: cancer, lupus, myocardial infarction, pneumococcal pneumonia, rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic fever, and tuberculosis. A positive C-reactive protein may also be seen in some women who are taking birth control pills and in the later half of pregnancy
C&S	Culture &amp; Sensitivity
C.R.F.	Case Report Form
C.V.S.-Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome|C.V.S.|Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome	Sudden, repeated attacks of severe vomiting (particularly in children), nausea, and physical exhaustion with no apparent cause. Can last from a few hours to 10 days. Episodes of C.V.S. begin and end suddenly. Loss of fluids in the body and changes in chemicals in the body can require immediate medical attention. Also called abdominal migraine
Ca	Calcium
CA	Chronic Active
Cactus Grandiflorus	Used for for conditions of heart disease of nervous or drug origin, palpitations, irregular pulse, tachycardia, shortness of breath
Cadaveric Donor	an individual who has recently died of causes that do not affect the function of an organ to be transplanted. Either the person or the person's family has generously offered organs and/or tissues for transplantation
Cadaveric Graft	Tissue donated from a dead body
CAG	Cholangiogram, Chronic Atrophic Gastritis
CAH	Chronic Active Hepatitis
Calamus Root	Used for lack of mental focus, acidity, stomach problems, an aid to quit smoking. Said to have anti-arrhythmic, anti-tussive, hypotensive, anti-bacterial vasodilatory, and expectorant properties. Tincture of Calamus is useful as a parasiticide when directly applied to scabies and lice infestations. When added to the bath it quiets the nerves and induces a state of tranquillity. Avoid during pregnancy<BR>
Calcemia	Excess blood Calcium
Calcification	Hardening
Calcitriol	A physiologically active metabolic derivative of cholecalciferol that is synthesized in the liver and kidney and stimulates the intestinal absorption of calcium
Calcium	The body's most abundant mineral. Its primary function is to help build and maintain bones and teeth. Calcium is important to heart health, nerves, muscles and skin. Calcium helps control blood acid-alkaline balance, plays a role in cell division, muscle growth and iron utilization, activates certain enzymes, and helps transport nutrients through cell membranes. Calcium also forms a cellular cement called ground substance that helps hold cells and tissues together. Hypercalcemia is seen in malignant neoplasms (with or without bone involvement), primary and tertiary hyperparathyroidism, sarcoidosis, vitamin D intoxication, milk-alkali syndrome, Paget's disease of bone (with immobilization), thyrotoxicosis, acromegaly, and diuretic phase of renal acute tubular necrosis. For a given total calcium level, acidosis increases the physiologically active ionized form of calcium. Prolonged tourniquet pressure during venipuncture may spuriously increase total calcium. Hypocalcemia must be interpreted to relation to serum albumin concentration. True decrease in the physiologically active ionized form of Ca++ occurs in many situations, including hypoparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, chronic renal failure, Mg++ deficiency, prolonged anticonvulsant therapy, acute pancreatitis, massive transfusion, alcoholism, etc.
Calcium Channel Blockers	Medicines for angina (chest pain) and high blood pressure affect the movement of calcium into the cells of the heart and blood vessels, relax blood vessels, and increase the flow of blood and oxygen to the heart. Examples of calcium channel blockers include diltiazem (Cardizem), nifedipine (Procardia), and verpamil (Isoptin)
Calcium Oxalate Stone	Kidney stone
Calculosis	Condition characterized by by the presence of Calculi
Calculus	An abnormal concretion occurring within the body and usually composed of mineral salts, a stone (lithiasis). Also called Kidney and Gallstones
CALD	Chronic Active Liver Disease
Calendula	Used for treating local skin problems. Also be used for any external bleeding or wound, and bruising or strains
California Poppy	Used effectively as a sedative. Colic pains, may also be useful in the treatment of gall-bladder colic
Calmative	Drug having a mild sedative effect
Canal of Hering	A biliary channel lined partially by biliary epithelium (cholangiocytes) and partially by hepatocytes situated at the periphery of portal tracts or within the parenchyma in the periportal region
Canaliculus	One of the narrow spaces between cells in the anastomosing cords of cells that make up a liver lobule
Cancer	Term for more than 100 diseases in which abnormal cells multiply without control. Cancer cells can spread through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to other parts of the body
Candidiasis	Thrush
CAP	Chronic Alcoholic Pancreatitis
Capillaria	A genus of slender white nematode worms of the family Trichuridae that includes serious pathogens of the alimentary tract of fowls and some tissue and organ parasites of mammals including one (C. hepatica) which is common in rodents and occas. invades the human liver sometimes with fatal results
Capillary	Any of the smallest blood vessels connecting arterioles with venules and forming networks throughout the body
Capillary Refill	When a fingernail is pressed, the nail bed turns white. Capillary refill refers to the return of the nail bed to pink color. Good cap refill is two seconds or less
Capsicum	Hot Red Chili Peppers--Studies indicate that capsicum could help prevent the formation of blood clots. New research is focusing on this spices ability to act as an anti-inflammatory agent, and aid in controlling pain. Breaks down blood clots. Helps in controlling pain associated with herpes zoster, known as shingles, as well as neuralgia and postoperative amputation trauma. Taken internally to aid digestion. Avoid getting capsicum products in the eyes, can be extremely painful
Capsid	Protective shell of protein that surrounds the genetic material of a virus
Capsomere	Protein-based subunit of a viral capsid. Capsomeres are designed to attract each other in a certain pattern - when enough are present, they self-assemble to form the capsid
Capsule	Various sized, hollow, soluble, transparent tubes used to contain and administer medicines
Caraway	Carum Carvi--Used as a digestive aid, helps expel gas and reduce nausea. Increases appetite, stimulates production of breast milk in nursing mothers, eases colic in infants. Effective expectorant for coughs due to colds
CARB	Carbohydrate
Carbohydrate	One of the three nutrients that supply calories (energy) to our body. Carbohydrate provides 4 calories per gram, the same number of calories as pure protein and less than half the calories of fat. Carbohydrates are essential for normal body function
Carbon Dioxide	Colorless, odorless gas present in small amounts in the atmosphere and formed during respiration
Carcinogen	Cancer-causing substance
Carcinogenic	Cancer causing
Carcinoma	Cancer that begins in the lining or covering of an organ. Cancerous growth that occurs in the tissues that cover the internal and external surfaces of the body
Cardamom	Elletaria Cardamonum--Helps stimulate digestion and relieve gas
Cardiac Arrest	Sudden cessation of the heart's pumping action, possibly due to a heart attack, respiratory arrest, electrical shock, extreme cold, blood loss, drug overdose, or a severe allergic reaction
Cardiac Cirrhosis	Fibrosis of the liver, probably following central hemorrhagic necrosis, in association with congestive heart disease. It is characterized by scarring about the central veins of the hepatic lobules
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation	Administration of heart compression and artificial respiration to restore circulation and breathing
Cardiovascular System	Heart and blood vessels that are responsible for circulating blood throughout the body
Carminative	Drug used to relieve flatulence, or to expel gas from the intestine
Carnitine	Compound found in skeletal and cardiac muscle and certain other tissues that functions as a carrier of fatty acids across the membranes of the mitochondria. Carnitine has been used therapeutically in treating angina and certain deficiency diseases
Carotenoid	Group of red, orange and yellow pigments found in plant foods and in the tissues of organisms that consume plants. Carotenoids have antioxidant activity and some, but not all, can act as precursors of vitamin A. Studies have shown that several carotenoids other than betacarotene are potent antioxidants that provide profound health benefits. The scientific community has now recognized the importance of natural mixed carotenoids including beta carotene
Carrier	Practically all people who are HCV antibody positive 'carry' the virus. The term 'carrier' is often misused, though, to mean someone who has the hepatitis C virus yet is in good health. In regard to hepatitis C, the term 'carrier' is used less and less. Better definitions of illness status include antibody positive or antibody negative; symptomatic or asymptomatic. Most important to note, is that all people who are hepatitis C antibody positive need to be aware of potentially passing on the virus
Carrier Status	A term used to describe those who suffer with chronic viral hepatitis, refers particularly continued infectivity of those patients
Carrots	Daucus Carota-- Plant form of Vitamin A, rich in Carotene, believed to help prevent certain types of cancer. Excellent for the eyes, helps counteract weak vision and night blindness, may also lower blood cholesterol level. Also a good treatment for diarrhea, relieves gas and heartburn. Soothes indigestion
Cascara Sagrada	Rhamnus Purshiana--Also known as Chittem bark and Sacred bark. Used to treat constipation and upset stomach. Recommended as a tonic for the digestive system, to stimulate the liver, gallbladder pancreas, and stomach. It is also considered to be useful in the treatment of jaundice, colic and hemorrhoids. Useful in detoxifying and cleansing programs. Used in small doses as a liver tonic, also as a chelating agent to prevent the occurrence of calcium-based urinary stones. When using, if diarrhea should result, discontinue use immediately
Case-control Study	A study in which the risk factors of people with a disease are compared with those without a disease
Case Report Form-CRF	A standardized data entry form used in a clinical trial. Generally, all information collected in trials appears on case report forms, or is referred to and explained by case report forms (as in the case of attached lab slips). Even in circumstances where there is other documentation in addition to CRFs (like the lab slips), generally all key values that will be analyzed appear on the CRF
CAT	Computed Abdominal Tomography
Cat's Claw	Uncaria Tomentosa--This herb is grown as a vine commonly known as Cat's Claw and has been used traditionally for thousands of years. Recently, several of the alkaloid chemical constituents of the plant have been isolated and available in standardized amounts. These alkaloids have been shown to have profound beneficial properties affecting immune function,with the ability to cleanse the entire intestinal tract. Used to treat colitis, Crohn's disease, irritable bowel syndrome, and leaky bowel syndrome
Catabolic Changes	Breakdown of complex molecules into simpler ones
Catabolism	Chemical breakdown
Catalyse	Speed up
Catalyst	Substance that influences the rate of a chemical reaction without being changed in the process. Usually present in very small amounts
Catalyst	Substance that causes a chemical reaction to go faster, but is not itself changed during the reaction <BR>
Catalytic Model	Type of compartmental model in which the force of infection is treated as a parameter to be estimated
Cataract	Disorder in which the lens of the eye becomes partly or completely opaque as a result of the precipitation of proteins
Catcher's Mask	A device used for a patient with bleeding varices in the throat that allows a tube with two balloons attached to be positioned securely in the throat and inflated. The balloons then put pressure on the enlarged veins in order to stop the bleeding
CATH	Catheter
Cathartic	Drug used to help in the evacuation of the bowel; a laxative or purgative
Catheter	A thin, flexible plastic tube that can be placed inside some part of the body--for example, a Foley catheter which is used to drain urine from the bladder
Catheterization	Technique in which a hollow and flexible tube is used to drain body fluids (such as urine), to introduce fluids into the body, or to examine or widen a narrowed vein or artery
Catnip	Calmative, Catnip tea is widely believed to hasten slumber and help in achieving a restful nights sleep, used in the treatment of tension and anxiety, mild diaphoretic, helps in digestion, relieves upset stomach, and controls the symptoms of diarrhea
CATS	Combined Abdominal Transsacral Resection Technique
Catuaba	Strong fortifier and tonic of the nervous system, has been known to help failing memories, helps eliminate restless sleep and insomnia from hypertension. Also used as a male aphrodisiac, tonic to the male organs. Used to treat male impotency
Caudate Lobe	Also called Spigelian Lobe. A lobe of the liver bounded on the right by the inferior vena cava, on the left by the fissure of the ductus venosus, and connected with the right lobe by a narrow prolongation
Causal	Cause related
Causation	There is causation only when one factor necessarily alters the possibility of a second. Statistical methods alone cannot establish a causal relationship between factors. Examples of criteria to test causation include: (1) strength of the association, (2) biologic credibility of the association, (3) consistency of the findings with other investigations, (4) temporal relationship of the association, (5) presence of a dose-response relationship. Randomization allows assessment of causation
Cautery	Destroying tissue by heat, chemicals or, intense cold
Cavity	Hollow
Cayenne	Capsicum Frutescens. Capsicum Annuum. Also referred to as Capsicum, chili pepper or red pepper and comes from the family Solanaceae. These plants have been highly valued as spices and are extensively cultivated, which results in peppers widely differing from one another in size, shape and pungency. Used to treat certain types of chronic pain, including diabetic foot pain, arthritis, and shingles. Aids digestion and may help prevent heart disease. Experts recommend taking cayenne in capsules, which you can get from a herbal store (<a href="http://naturesresponse.com/">Nature's Response</A>). Cayenne is generally regarded as safe unless you have ulcers or a history of stomach problems. Remember to wash your hands thoroughly after using
CB	Conjugated Bilirubin
CBC	Complete Blood Count
CBD	Common Bile Duct
CBDE	Common Bile Duct Exploration
CBH	Chronic Benign Hepatitis
cc	See cubic centimeter
CCBR	Coordinating Center for Biometric Research
CD	Crohn's Disease
CD4	(T4)-Another name for a "helper" T-cell. A protein embedded in the cell surface of helper T-lymphocytes; also found to a lesser degree on the surface of monocyte/macrophage, langerhans cells, astrocytes, keratinocytes, and glial cells
CD4 Cell	Helper" T-cell, responsible for coordinating much of the immune response
CD4 Count	The number of T-helper lymphocytes per cubic millimeter of blood. The CD4 count is a good predictor of immune health. A CD4 count less than 200 qualifies as a diagnosis of AIDS
CD4, CD8|CD4|CD8	Immune cells, CD4, Symbol for glycoprotein expressed on the surface of most phytocytes and some lymphocytes, including Helper T cells. Human CD4 is the receptor that serves as a docking site for HIV viruses on certain lymphocyte cells. Binding of the viral glycoprotein gp120 to CD4 is the first step in viral entry, leading to the fusion of viral and cell membrane <BR>
CD8 Count	The number of killer/suppresser T-lymphocytes in a cubic millimeter of blood
CD8-T8	Another name for a &quotkiller" T-cell. A protein embedded in the cell surface of killer and suppresser T-lymphocytes
CDC	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention responsible for estimating prevalence rates and epidemiological studies
CE	Cardioesophageal, Cholesteryl Esters
CEA	Carcinoembryonic Antigen
Cecum	Dilated pouch that forms the first part of the large intestine and connects the colon to the ileum
CEH	Carboxylic Ester Hydrolase
Celandine	Chelidonium Majus--Used externally for warts. Useful for insufficient bile with clay-colored or gray-colored stools, stagnant liver with flank pain. Helps prevent gall stone formation, and is used with Chionanthus to expel biliary calculi. Celandine also has marked anti-viral activity against retrovirus' <BR>
Celery Seed	May add protection against cancer, high cholesterol and high blood pressure. Contains has a diuretic substance, which will help you to lose water weight
Celiac Sprue	also called Celiac Disease, Nontropical Sprue, Gluten Sensitive Enteropathy, Gluten Intolerance . Inherited disorder in which the lining of the small intestine is damaged when the affected individual eats rye, oats, barley or wheat. Gluten, a protein in these grains, is thought to be the offending agent
Cell	Smallest component of a living organism (except for viruses, which do not have cells). Some organisms, like algae and bacteria, consist of a single cell, which contains all of their functions and processes. More complex organisms (such as humans), consist of large numbers of specialized cells (blood cells, heart cells, muscle cells, etc.) which combine to form the larger organism. A typical cell consists of a cell membrane or cell wall which contains the cells structures, a cytoplasm ( jelly-like substance which fills the cell), a nucleus (a central structure within the cell which contains genetic material), and a number of smaller components which are responsible for disposing of waste and generating energy, and producing materials necessary for the operation of the cell <BR>
Cell Lines	Specific cell types artificially maintained in the laboratory (in-vitro) for scientific purposes <BR>
Cell-Mediated Immunity|CMI	CMI--A branch of the immune system responsible for the reaction to foreign material by specific defense cells (T-lymphocytes, killer cells, macrophage and other white blood cells) rather than antibodies
Cell Membrane	Cell surface. Delicate structure which encloses the cell, separating the contents of the cell from the surrounding environment
Cell Wall	Semirigid, permeable structure that is composed of lignin, cellulose, or other substances that envelopes most plant cells
Cellcept®	An immunosuppressive drug used with other immunosuppressants to prevent the rejection of a transplanted organ. Also known by its chemical name, myophenolate mofetil
Cellular	Of, Pertaining to, or consisting of cells
Cellular Immunity	Referring to the action of T cell lymphocytes in the role of specific responses to antigens
Cellular Infiltration	Passage of cells into tissues in the course of acute, subacute, or chronic inflammation
Cellulitis	Skin infection caused by bacteria (usually streptococci); can lead to tissue damage and blood poisoning if untreated; characterized by fever, chills, heat, tenderness, and redness
Cellulose	A kind of dietary fiber that is resistent to digestion by humans. Cellulose is the basic constituent of all vegetable tissues and the most abundant organic material in the world
Celsius	A measurement of temperature (Celsius or Centigrade) that is commonly used in Europe. Normal body temperature is considered to be 37 degrees Celsius or 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit. Body temperature can vary 1/2 degree Celsius above or below 37 C. and still be considered "normal." Body temperature varies with many factors including level of activity. To convert a Fahrenheit temperature to Celsius use: C = (F - 32) x 5/9. To convert a Celsius temperature to Fahrenheit use: F = (C x 9/5) + 32
Censoring	A term used in survival or time-to-event analyses to denote an individual who has not experienced the event of interest as of a specific point in follow-up, e.g. time of interim analysis, end of study, or time at lost to follow-up. The process by which patient outcome data cannot be obtained beyond a specific point in time <BR>
Centella	Centella Asiatica Urban--Also known as Pennywort and Gotu Kola. Used to bring down fevers and relieve congestion due to upper respiratory infections and colds. Improves the flow of blood throughout the body by strengthening the capillaries and veins, used to treat phlebitis, swelling of the legs, leg cramps, tingling or heaviness in the legs. Relieves high blood pressure, senility, mental fatigue, and helps the body defend itself against different toxins, blood purifier, skin problems, rheumatism. Large doses it can act as a sedative. Contains Vitamins A, G, K, is also high in magnesium. Supporting agents for Centella include: Bilberry, Butcher's Broom, Silica, Zinc, Vitamins C, D and E
--Centi|Centi	1/100g. Centigram (cg) is a measure of weight; centiliter (cl) is a measure of volume
Centigrade	See Celsius
--Cento	A prefix meaning a hundred times, as in centogram, a hundred grams
Central Line	The central location in the circulation of the vein used, usually in the internal jugular and subclavian veins in the neck, or the femoral veins in the groin. This has the benefit of being able to send more fluid into the body
Central Nervous System	CNS--Composed of the brain, spinal cord, and its coverings (meninges)
Central Vein	Also called Intralobular Vein. Any of the veins in the lobules of the liver that occur one in each lobule running from the apex to the base, receive blood from the sinusoids, and empty into the sublobular veins
Centrilobular	Relating to or affecting the center of a lobule centrilobular necrosis in the liver
Cephalalgia	Headache
Cerebellum	Region of the brain located at the back; responsible for coordination of movement and maintaining balance
Cerebral	Relating to the brain
Cerebroside	Any of various lipids composed of ceramide and a monosaccharide and found especially in the myelin sheath of nerves
Cerebrum	Largest part of the brain and the site of most of its activity, including sensory and motor functions
Ceroid	A yellow to brown pigment found particularly in the liver in cirrhosis
Cerumen	Ear Wax
Cesium	A radioactive isotope used for continuous internal radiotherapy
Cetylmyristoleate	CMO--Is effective in treating patients afflicted with mild to severe cases of various forms of arthritis. Studies Show a consistent, permanent relief from pain, inflammation, and marked deformation of nearly all interphalangeal &amp; large joints
CF	Cystic Fibrosis. Complement fixation, Fixating
CFR	Code of Federal Regulations
CGD	Chronic Granulomatous Disease
CGRP	Calcitonin Gene Related Peptide
CH	Cholesterol
Ch.	Chapter
CHA	Common Hepatic Artery
Chain Reaction	A reaction in which a product reacts and thus continues the reaction
Chamomile	Matricaria Chamomilla. Chamomile is a member of the Asteraceae or daisy family and yields a blue-colored volatile oil. Often taken in a tea form, chamomile is most effective in whole extracts or preparations containing quantities of the volatile oil. A soothing and calming tea, used in treatment for skin conditions, cramps and digestion, mild sedative, remedy for insomnia, aid for digestion. Chamomile tea is extremely safe, though ingestion of large amounts can lead to stomach upset. Those allergic to asters, ragweed and chrysanthemums may produce hypersensitivity to chamomile products. Though these reactions are extremely rare, they can lead to congestion, sneezing, anaphylaxis or contact dermatitis
Chance	Random variation, i.e., the happening of events without an apparent cause
Chaparral	Larrea Tridentata--also known as Creosote bush and Greasewood. Too toxic to be recommended for human consumption.
Characteristics	Traits or attributes that describe a person or thing
Chaste Tree	also called Vitex. Used for premenstrual stress, dysmenorrhoea, disorders related to hormone function. Particularly beneficial during menopausal changes. Helps restore a normal estrogen to progesterone balance. Can help control acne in teenagers
CHCV	Chronic Hepatitis C Virus
Chem 7	A battery of blood chemistry tests; the seven parts of a Chem 7; sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and glucose
Chemical	Two or more atoms united by chemical bonds to form a molecule. Over four million chemicals are known to man. When chemicals interfere with normal chemical processes in living cells, they are referred to as toxins. Plants and fungi often produce toxins to discourage browsing by insects and larger animals. A man-made toxin has properties identical to the same toxin produced by a plant
Chemo	Chemical
Chemoembolization	Blocking the blood flow to a certain area by means of intravenous drugs
Chemoprophylaxis	Drug treatment designed to prevent future occurrences of disease. Treatment may be chemotherapy as far as an individual is concerned but chemopropylactic for the population as a whole
Chemotherapeutic	Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy	Treatment with anticancer drugs, treatment of infections or cancer with drugs that act on disease producing organisms or cancerous tissue; may also affect normal cells. Drug treatment of a diseased individual
Chenodeoxycholic Acid	A drug, identical to one of the natural bile acids, it can dissolve cholesterol gallstones in some patients
Chickweed	Stellaric Media--Taken internally, as a team Chickweed is used to treat asthma, arthritis, blood disorders, cancer, constipation, fevers, gout, lung disease, and aids in weight control. As an oil to make a poultice, chickweed is used as a treatment for skin disorders such as boils, eczema, psoriasis, ulcers, and a many types of rashes. No reported toxic effects from consumption of chickweed
Chinese Liver Fluke	A common and destructive Asian liver fluke of the genus Clonorchis (C. sinensis) that has a complex life cycle involving a mollusk and a fish as intermediate hosts and that esp. in eastern and southeastern Asia is a serious human parasite invading the liver following the consumption of raw infected fish and causing clonorchiasis
Chloasma	Liver spots or ages spots that occur during pregnancy
Chlorella	Chlorella Pyrenoidosa. Chlorella is a green, single celled micro-algae that has been at the base of the planetary food chain for over 2.5 billion years. Chlorella is one of the most widely and intensely researched therapeutic foods available today. Literally hundreds of scientific papers have been presented documenting its efficacy in human nutrition. Chlorella contains a broader spectrum of significant nutrients than any other known food source. It is the world's highest source of chlorophyll, much higher than spirulina<BR>
Chloride	Increase in serum chloride is seen in dehydration, renal tubular acidosis, acute renal failure, diabetes insipidus, prolonged diarrhea, salicylate toxicity, respiratory alkalosis, hypothalamic lesions, and adrenocortical hyperfunction. Drugs causing increased chloride include acetazolamide, androgens, corticosteroids, cholestyramine, diazoxide, estrogens, guanethidine, methyldopa, oxyphenbutazone, phenylbutazone, thiazides, and triamterene. Bromides in serum will not be distinguished from chloride in routine testing, so intoxication may show spuriously increased chloride. Decrease in serum chloride is seen in excessive sweating, prolonged vomiting, salt-losing nephropathy, adrenocortical defficiency, various acid base disturbances, conditions characterized by expansion of extracellular fluid volume, acute intermittent porphyria, SIADH, etc. Drugs causing decreased chloride include bicarbonate, carbenoxolone, corticosteroids, diuretics, laxatives, and theophylline
Chlorine	Poisonous gas, but in the form of chloride compounds it is an essential mineral nutrient. Acts with sodium to help maintain the balance between fluids inside and outside cells. Bananas, Barley (pearled), Beets, Blackstrap molasses, Brazil nuts, Carrots, Celery, Coconut (dried), Coconut (fresh), Dandelion greens, Endive, Hazelnuts, Head Lettuce, Kale, Kohlrabi, Leaf Cabbage, Leaf Lettuce, Parsley, Pecans, Rhubarb, Spinach, Sweet potatoes, Turnip Greens, Turnips (white), Watercress, Wheat (whole) contain significant amounts of this nutrient
Chlorpromazine	Tranquilizer relieves anxiety or agitation. Examples of brand names include Thorazine and Ormazine <BR>
Chlorpromazine	Tranquilizer that relieves agitation anxiety
Chlorthalidone	A sulfonamide, that is a long-acting diuretic used in the treatment of hypertension and in the treatment of edema associated particularlywith cirrhosis of the liver, renal dysfunction, congestive heart failure, or corticosteroid and estrogen therapy
CHOL	Cholesterol
Cholangiogram	Radiographic imaging of the bile ducts after the direct injection of radio-opaque dye <BR>
Cholangiography	Bile duct X-ray
Cholangitis	Inflammation of the bile ducts, or biliary tract
Cholanopoiesis	Synthesis of cholic acid, its derivatives, or bile by the liver
Cholechromopoiesis	Formation of bile pigments by the liver
Cholecystectomy	Surgical removal of the gallbladder
Cholecystitis	Inflammation of the gallbladder
Cholecystography--Oral|Cholecystography|Oral Cholecystography	Diagnostic test in which an x-ray is taken of the gallbladder after the patient has swallowed pills containing a special dye. The dye is absorbed from the intestine and then passed into the bile to reach the gallbladder
Choledochoplasty	Repair of a bile duct
Cholelithiasis	Gallstones, Presence or formation of gallstones
Cholemia	The presence of excess bile in the blood usually indicative of liver disease
Choleresis	The flow of bile from the liver especially when increased above a previous or normal level
Choleretic	Promoting bile secretion by the liver
Cholestasis	Bile flow stoppage
Cholestasis, Intrahepatic|Intrahepatic Cholestasis	Intrahepatic impairment of bile flow. It is usually due to liver cell damage, but may be due to obstruction of intrahepatic bile ducts. It is also called hepatocellular jaundice and medical jaundice <BR>
Cholesterol	Soft, waxy substance. It is made in sufficient quantity by the body for normal body function, including the manufacture of hormones, vitamin D and bile acid. Present in all parts of the body, including the liver, heart, nervous system, muscle, intestines and skin. There are two types of cholesterol--Dietary Cholesterol and Blood Cholesterol <BR>
Choline	Lipotropic substance sometimes included in the vitamin B complex as essential for the metabolism of fats in the body. Precursor to acetylcholine, a major neurotransmitter in the brain. Choline prevents the deposition of fats in the liver and facilitates the movement of fats into the cells. Deficiency leads to cirrhosis of the liver. Essential to liver function. Very important in controlling fat & cholesterol buildup in the body. Helps regulate the kidneys, liver & gallbladder, important for proper nerve transmission and helps improve memory. Choline deficieny symptoms may result in cirrhosis and fatty degeneration of the liver, hardening of the arteries, heart problems, high blood pressure, and/or hemorrhaging kidneys
Chondroitin	Acts as a water magnets within our joint cartilage. Chondroitin helps attract fluid into the proteoglycan molecules, which acts as a spongy shock absorber for the bones, and as a mechanism to sweep body nutrients into the cartilage for nourishment & lubrication
Chromium	Mineral that becomes a part of the glucose tolerance factor (GTF). Aids in insulin utilization and blood sugar control. By controlling blood sugar, chromium helps prevent the damage caused by glucose, which is called glycation. Helps maintain normal cholesterol levels and improves high-density lipoprotein levels. Important in building muscle and reducing obesity. Also cleans the arteries by reducing cholesterol &amp; triglyceride levels; helps transport amino acids to where the body needs them; and helps control the appetite. A deficiency of chromium may result in glucose intolerance in diabetics; atherosclerosis, depressed growth, heart disease, obesity, and/or fatigue. Research showa that persons with low levels of chromium in their bodies are more susceptible to having cancer and heart problems, and of becoming diabetic <BR>
Chromium Picolinate	Has an insulin stimulating and binding action. This ingredient is frequently used in many over the counter weight loss preparations
Chronic	Long duration, possibly years, frequent recurrence over a long time, and often by slowly progressing seriousness, not acute. One that suffers from a chronic disease
Chronic Active Hepatitis	Any form of liver inflammation lasting more than six months and causing continuing damage to liver cells. It often precedes cirrhosis
Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD)|Chronic Granulomatous Disease	Caused by a defect in an enzyme called phagocyte NADPH oxidase, or phox. White blood cells use this enzyme to generate hydrogen peroxide, which the cells need to kill bacteria and fungi. Mutations in one of four different genes can cause this defect, which leads to frequent and often life-threatening infections of the skin, lungs and bones with localized, swollen collections of inflamed tissue called granulomas. Approximately four to five of every million people worldwide have CGD, including about 1,000 people in the United States
Chronic Hepatitis	Long lasting, progressive destruction of the liver, leading eventually to cirrhosis and liver failure
Chronic Infection	Infection that lasts for a long time or returns after it appeared of been cured.The converse of acute infections, i.e. prolonged and stubborn. Caused by viruses which are able to persist in the body
Chronic Liver Disease	Slow process and persisting over a long period of time, resulting in a progressive destruction of the liver
Chronic Persistent Hepatitis	A mild form of chronic hepatitis, usually associated with a better outcome. In Hepatitis C, the distinction between chronic active and chronic persistent hepatitis is not so clear cut
Chronotropic	Speed related
Chylomicrons	Minute fat particles present in lymph which normally are quickly cleared from the blood
Chyme	Thick liquid mixture of stomach juices and partly digested food that passes from the stomach into the intestines. Name given to our food once it has been liquified and mixed with stomach acids and enzymes
Ci	Curie
CIA	Congenital Intestinal Aganglionosis
CIBD	Chronic Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Cicatrization	Scarring
Cilantro	also called Corriander and Chinese Parsley. The leaves are called Cilantro and the seeds are called Corriander. Eases indigestion and prevents wound infection
Cimetidine	Tagamet--Drug used to control ulcer pain and to aid in the healing of peptic ulcers by reducing the amount of acid the stomach secretes
Cinchona	Primary sources of Quinine. Large doses of Cinchona have a depressant effect on the heart, small amounts are harmless. Same anti-malarial activity as an effective dose of quinine
Cinchophen	A bitter white crystalline compound made synthetically that is used for treating gout and rheumatism but is damaging to the liver
CINE	Chemotherapy Induced Nausea and Emesis
Cinnamon	This herb has been used medicinally for thousands of years to fight tooth decay, clear up urinary tract infections and soothe stomach irritation. Chinese herbalists still recommend it for relieving nausea, fever, diarrhea, and menstrual problems. Modern herbalists disagree on its ability to aid in menstrual difficulties; some think it stimulates uterine contractions, while others believe it calms the muscle. Cinnamon oil is a different story. Applied to the skin, it may cause redness and burning. Taken internally, it can cause nausea, vomiting and possibly even kidney damage. Never ingest cinnamon oil. Culinary cinnamon is on the Food and Drug Administration's list of herbs generally regarded as safe. For healthy non-pregnant adults, there's no danger from medicinal doses
Circular Deoxyribonucleic Acid	Single or double stranded ring of DNA found in the human wart virus and certain bacteriophages
Circulatory and Respiratory Physiology	Functions and activities of cardiovascular circulation and of respiration and respiratory mechanics
Cirrhogenic	Tending to cause cirrhosis of the liver
Cirrhosis	A condition where scar tissue develops in the liver - to the extent where such scaring becomes extensive and permanent. Cirrhosis interferes with the normal functioning of the liver. The formation of fibrous scar tissue in place of healthy cells, obstructing the flow of blood through the liver. As a result, the various functions of the liver deteriorate. Widespread disruption of normal liver structure by fibrosis and the formation of regenerative nodules that is caused by any of various chronic progressive conditions affecting the liver
Cirrhosis, Laennec's, Portal Cirrhosis|Cirrhosis|Laennec's Cirrhosis|Portal Cirrhosis	Hepatic cirrhosis in which increased connective tissue spreads out from the portal spaces compressing and distorting the lobules, causing impairment of liver function, and ultimately producing the typical hobnail liver <BR>
Cirrhosis, Postnecrotic|Postnecrotic Cirrhosis	Cirrhosis of the liver following widespread necrosis of liver cells especially as a result of hepatitis <BR>
Cirrhotic	Person affected with cirrhosis. Of, relating to, caused by, or affected with cirrhosis
Cirrhotic Liver	One that is the site of cirrhosis
CIS	Carcinoma In Situ
Citric Acid	Colorless crystalline acid
CK	Creatine Kinase
Cl	Chloride; Chlorine
Classic Lobule	The hexagonal lobule as originally described by Kiernan with the terminal hepatic vein (central vein) surrounded by 6 terminal portal tracts
Classical Epidemiology	Term for the varieties of epidemiology primarily concerned with the statistical relationships between disease agents, both infectious and non-infectious; for example a study to establish the relative risk of lung cancer associated with smoking <BR>
Claudication	Limping caused by impaired blood supply to the legs
Cleavers	Perhaps the best tonic to the lymphatic system available. Cleavers may be used safely in a wide range of problems where the lymphatic system is involved. These include swollen glands (lymphadenitis) anywhere in the body, especially in tonsillitis and adenoid trouble. Used to treat skin conditions, especially the dry skin such as psoriasis. Used in the treatment of cystitis and other urinary conditions where there is pain. Effective in the treatment of ulcers and tumors. This may have its basis in the lymphatic drainage, which helps detoxify tissue. For the lymphatic system, combine this herb with Echinacea or Calendula. For skin conditions, combine Cleavers with Burdock and Yellow Dock. For diuretic purposes, Cleavers is often used with Bearberry and/or Buchu
Clinical	Pertaining to a clinic or to the bedside. Pertaining to or founded on actual observation and treatment of patients, as distinguished from theoretical or basis sciences
Clinical Cooperative Group	A group of medical institutions cooperating to perform clinical research
Clinical Depression	A clinical syndrome that includes a persistent sad mood or loss of interest in activities that persists for at least 2 weeks in the absence of external precipitants
Clinical Investigator	A medically qualified scientist who works with patients in clinical investigations and Clinical Trials
Clinical Presentation	This refers to the typical physical signs or symptoms that are associated with a particular disease process. The proper interpretation of the clinical presentation often leads to a specific diagnosis
Clinical Studies	See Clinical Trials. Human studies that are designed to measure the safety, efficacy, and appropriate dosage of a new drug or biological. Clinical studies routinely involve the use of a placebo group that is given an inactive substance that looks like the test product
Clinical Syndrome	A clinical syndrome represents a typical constellation of physical (and laboratory) findings that may be seen as part of a primary disease process
Clinical Trials	Carefully controlled tests that are done to learn the effectiveness and safety of new medical drugs and techniques. See Clinical Studies
Cloacin	A bacteriocin produced by a plasmid that can occur in several bacterial strains. It is a basic protein of molecular weight 56,000 and exists in a complex with its immunity protein which protects the host bacterium from its effects
Clone-Cloning	A group of cells derived from a single cell by repeated mitosis, or repeatedly dividing to make more cells. Aggregate of the asexually produced progeny of an individual. An individual grown from a single somatic cell of its parent and genetically identical to it
Clonorchiasis	Infection of the biliary passages with the liver fluke Opisthorchis sinensis, (Chinese Liver Fluke) may lead to inflammation of the biliary tree, proliferation of the biliary epithelium, progressive portal fibrosis, and sometimes biliary duct carcinoma; extension into the liver parenchyma may lead to fatty changes and cirrhosis. Invades bile ducts of the liver after ingestion in uncooked fish and when present in numbers causes severe systemic reactions including edema, liver enlargement, and diarrhea
Close Contact Infection	An infection which requires close contact, other than sexual contact, between susceptible and infectious individuals, for transmission
Cloves	Caryophyllum Aromaticus--Powerful food preservative. Put several in a ham and it will last several days longer in the refrigerator. Oil of clove has been used for thousands of years as a remedy for toothache. Clove oil is highly antiseptic. It is also used to stop vomiting. Studies show that the oil in cloves can help kill several strains of staphylococcus bacteria and one strain of pseudomonas organisms that can cause skin infections. To treat cuts, make a poultice by grinding up several cloves and mixing in water to form a paste. Apply the poultice directly to the site of the cut. Cover it with a warm towel. Ingesting high doses of clove oil may cause stomach upset.) If a clove poultice causes skin reddening or a rash, discontinue use
cm	Centimeter
CMI	Cell-Mediated Immunity--A branch of the immune system responsible for the reaction to foreign material by specific defense cells (T-lymphocytes, killer cells, macrophage and other white blood cells) rather than antibodies
CMO	Cetylmyristoleate
CMV	See Cytomegalovirus
CNS	Central Nervous System
Co-evolution	Changes in the genotypes of two or more species that are a direct consequence of the species' interaction with one another
CO2	Carbon Dioxide
CO2 Content	Increase in serum CO2 content for the most part reflects increase in serum bicarbonate concentration rather than dissolved CO2 gas (which accounts for only a small fraction of the total). Increased serum bicarbonate is seen in compensated respiratory acidosis and in metabolic alkalosis. Diuretics (thiazides, ethacrynic acid, furosemide, mercurials), corticosteroids (in long term use), and laxatives (when abused) may cause increased bicarbonate. Critical studies on bicarbonate are best done on anaerobically collected heparinized whole blood (as for blood gas determination) because of interaction of blood and atmosphere in routinely collected serum specimens. Decrease in blood CO2 is seen in metabolic acidosis and compensated respiratory alkalosis. Substances causing metabolic acidosis include ammonium chloride, acetazolamide, ethylene glycol, methanol, paraldehyde, and phenformin. Salicylate poisoning is characterized by early respiratory alkalosis followed by metabolic acidosis with attendant decreased bicarbonate
Coag Panel	Blood test used to determine the clotting factors of a patient's blood
Coagulase	Any bacterial component or product which causes coagulation in plasma containing an anticoagulant such as citrate, heparin or oxalate. Coagulases are produced by certain staphylococci and by Yersinia pestis. Staphylococci produce two types of coagulase: Staphylocoagulase, a free coagulase that produces true clotting of plasma, and Staphylococcal clumping factor, a bound coagulase in the cell wall that induces clumping of cells in the presence of fibrinogen
Coagulation	Clotting
Coagulopathy	Decreased ability to synthesize clotting factors
Cobalamin	Vitamin B-12. Essential for the normal functioning of all body cells, especially those of bone marrow, gastrointestinal tract and nervous system Also necessary for the formation of red blood cells. Prevents pernicious anemia and is necessary to a healthy nervous system. It is involved in synthesis of genetic material (DNA). It iss needed for effective calcium absorption in the body. A deficiency of Cobalamin may lead to pernicious anemia, poor appetite, brain damage, degeneration of spinal cord, depression, nervousness, neuritis, growth failure in children, tiredness, and/or lack of balance
Cod Liver Oil	Pale-yellow, fatty oil extracted from the fresh livers of the codfish and other related species. A rich source of fat-soluble vitamins A and D. Aids the liver, helps the brain, nervous system, strengthens bones, aids in the production of prostaglandin. Calcium is better assimilated in the presence of Vitamin D3. Also works as a lubricant to alleviate stiffness & pain in the joints
Code Brown	Term used when a patient doesn't make it to the bathroom in time
Codon	Specific sequence of three consecutive nucleotides that is part of the genetic code and that specifies a particular amino acid in a protein or starts or stops protein synthesis, called also triplet
Codon, Imitation|Imitation Codon	Also called Initiator Codon. Codon that stimulates the binding of a transfer RNA which starts protein sythesis
Coenzyme	Organic nonprotein molecule
CoEnzyme Q-10	Natural substance found in every cell of the human body, particularly in the heart and liver. Helps to manufacture ATP (Adenosine Triphosphate). Aids in detoxification, sustains the immune system, potent antioxidant, lowers high blood pressure, Helps prevent heart and circulatory disease, effective in treating periodontal disease, slows the agin process. CoEnzyme Q-10 is found in every cell in our body. It is required by our body to tranmit carbohydrates, fats, and protein into ATP, the source of energy at cellular level
Cofactor	A substance, microorganism or environmental factor that activates or enhances the action of another entity such as a disease-causing agent. Cofactors may influence the progression of a desease or the likelihood of becoming ill
Coffee	Used to relieve nasal congestion, Control asthma, headaches, Boost athletic endurance, boosts the number of calories you burn per hour by about 4 %, Lessen the effect of jet lag. Coffee is addictive. Coffee causes insomnia and increasing anxiety, irritability and nervousness. It remains in the body for 8 to 12 hours. Also aggravates panic attacks. May cause stomach upset. People with ulcers or gastrointestinal conditions should drink it rarely, if at all
Cognitive	Understood
Cohort	A subsection of a population with a common feature, usually age
Coinfection	Infection with a virus when another infection is already present. Such as having Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C. Only people with Hepatitis B can be infected with Hepatitis D
Colchicine	Medicine that eases the inflammation from gout and prevents attacks from recurring
Colic	Pain in the abdomen or bowel due to distention, toxemia, inflammation, or obstruction
Colitis	Inflammation of the colon
Collagen	Protein in connective tissue and the organic substance found in teeth and bones
Collateral Vessel	Side branch of a blood vessel providing an alternative pathway for blood when blood flow in the main vessel is blocked
Collinsonia	Used in the treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy, chronic laryngitis hemorrhoids, and varicose veins. Also been used effectively for urinary calculi, colitis, chronic heart problems and diverticulosis. Works well with Saw Palmetto for benign prostatic hypertrophy
Colloid	Gelatinous or mucinous substance found in tissues in disease or normally (as in the thyroid), Mixture (as smoke) consisting of a colloid together with the medium in which it is dispersed, Substance that consists of particles dispersed throughout another substance which are too small for resolution with an ordinary light microscope but are incapable of passing through a semipermeable membrane
Colon	The part of the of the large intestine that extends to the rectum
Colonization	Residence of bacteria in, or on, part of the body and causing neither disease nor a response by the individual's immune system
Colonoscope	Long, flexible, narrow endoscope passed through the anus to look into the colon
Colonoscopy	Visualization of the colon with a flexible lighted instrument passed through the anus
Colostomy	Surgical procedure connecting an opening of the colon to a surgically created hole on the body's surface
Coltsfoot	Tussilago Farfara--Also called Coughwort and Horsehoof. Traditional herbalists in the form of a tea to treat the persistent cough associated with bronchitis, emphysema and silicosis. The dried flowers and leaves commonly used in Coltsfoot tea contain Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids which can cause severe liver damage and cancer. While some herbalists think the danger relatively minor when compared to the positive activities of this herb, other practitioners no longer consider Coltsfoot an appropriate remedy in light of other effective herbal alternatives
Comfrey	Also known as Blackwort, Bruisewort, Gum plant, Healing herb, Knitback, Salsify, Slippery root, and Wallwort. Used as an anodyne, astringent, demulcent, emollient, expectorant, hemostatic, refrigerant, and/or vulnerary. Makes a good gargle and mouthwash for throat inflammations, hoarseness, and bleeding gums. Drink it to take care of most digestive and stomach problems, for intestinal difficulties, for excessive menstrual flow, and to stop spitting blood. Powdered rootstock can also be taken internally for bloody urine (hematuria), leucorrhea, diarrhea, gastro-intestinal ulcers, dysentery, and persistent coughs. Externally, use the powder as a hemostatic agent, and make a poultice for bruises, insect bites, wounds, and sores. The hot pulp of the rootstock makes a good external application for bronchitis, pleurisy, pain and inflammation of pulled tendons. Add the rootstock to your bath water regularly for younger looking skin
Commensal	Microorganism
Common Bile Duct	The channel formed by the common hepatic and cystic ducts, carrying bile to mix with food in the duodenum, the first part of the small bowel
Common Bile Duct Obstruction	Blockage of the tube that allows the bile to pass from the liver to the small intestine
Common Hepatic Duct	The channel formed by the two hepatic ducts, which drain bile from the left and right sides of the liver
Community Advisory Board	A lay panel. consisting of patients and affected others, who provide guidance and feedback to clinical trials sites with respect to accrual, retention, compliance, access, and ethical issues surrounding clinical trials
Compartmental Model	A mathematical model which divides hosts into different compartments according to their infectious state
Compassionate Use	Method of providing unapproved drugs to very sick patients who have no other treatment options. Often, case-by-case approval must be obtained from the FDA for "compassionate use" of a drug
Compensating (ed)|Compensated|Compensating	Correcting a function that has been adversely affected
Compensation	The process of counterbalancing a lack or a defect of a body of physiologic function. A defense mechanisim
Complement	Collection of approximately 20 blood proteins. A group of proteins in normal blood serum and plasma that, in combination with antibodies, causes the destruction of antigens (particularly bacteria and foreign blood corpuscles)
Complement Cascade	A precise sequence of events, usually triggered by an antigen-antibody complex, in which each component of the complement system is activated in turn, inactivating and occasionally destroying pathogens <BR>
Complement Fixation (CF)|Complement Fixation	An assay for detecting the presence of antibodies reactive against a particular antigen, e.g. a virus
Complete Blood Count	CBC--Standard set of measurements of the white blood cells and red blood cells
Complex Carbohydrate	Fiber and Starch. Complex carbohydrate comes from plants. When complex carbohydrate is substituted for saturated fat, the saturated fat reduction lowers blood cholesterol. Foods high in starch include pasta, dried beans and peas, corn, and lima beans, cereals, rice and breads
Compliance	How closely a particular protocol is followed. May be influenced by the willingness and/or ability of patients to conform to treatment by taking medications as prescribed and keeping necessary clinic appointments. Often the resources available to the patient, and the resources and flexibility of the provider will have as great an implication for compliance as any specific patient behavior
Complications	New medical problems that arise will dealing with existing medical problems
Computerized Tomography (CT) Scanning	Diagnostic procedure in which the x-ray source rotates around the patient so that an x-ray beam is sent through the patient from many different angles. The x-rays are read by a computer, which constructs three-dimensional images of the body. Painless procedure<BR>
Conation	Aspect of mind or behavior that is governed by drives, wishes, impulses, appetites, motives, or aversions
Concomitant	Associated
Concomitant Drugs	At the same time
Conducting Portal Vein	The system of larger portal veins that supply terminal portal veins
Conduction	Transfer
Confidence Interval	The range of values that includes, with a stated probability (e.g. 95%), the actual population descriptor of interest
Congenital	From birth, Present at birth
Conjugate	Joined together, but opposite in some characteristic
Conjugated	Joined
Conjugation	Linkage
Conservative	Not extreme
Constipation	Infrequent and/or difficult passage of stools
Contact Rate	The rate at which susceptibles meet infecteds. Usually measured as individuals per unit time
Contagious	Any infectious disease capable of being transmitted by casual contact from one person to another
Contagious Disease	Disease that spreads from one person to another thru direct or indirect routes
Continence	Ability to hold in a bowel movement or urine
Contractability	Ability to contract
Contractile	Contracting, changing size
Contracture	Permanent tissue shortening
Contraindication	To indicate against. A specific circumstance when the use of certain treatments could be harmful
Controlled	Constrained, monitored, or watched. 2. A system of observation and data collection that provides a basis for comparison, as with a comparison group
Controlled Trial	A method for testing therapies in which the results of a proposed treatment are compared with a standard treatment or with a placebo. In general, two similar groups of patients are used, and both favorable and unfavorable results (i.e. toxicity) are recorded. Unlike anecdotal evidence, controlled trials often form the basis for treatment recommendations
Conventional	Normal
Cooperative Clinical Trial	Term frequently used to denote a multicenter trial
Copper	Essential mineral that is a component of several important enzymes in the body and is essential to good health. Found in all body tissues. Copper deficiency leads to a variety of abnormalities, including anemia, degeneration of the nervous system, skeletal defects, pronounced cardiovascular lesions, reproductive failure, elevated cholesterol, impaired immunity and defects in the pigmentation and structure of hair. Copper is involved in iron incorporation into hemoglobin. It is also involved with vitamin C in the formation of collagen and the proper functioning in central nervous system. More than a dozen enzymes have been found to contain copper. The best studied are superoxide dismutase (SOD), cytochrome C oxidase, catalase, dopamine hydroxylase, uricase, tryptophan dioxygenase, lecithinase and other monoamine and diamine oxidases. Plant sources are: Currants, Legumes, Mushrooms, Nuts and Raisins
COQ10	Co-enzyme Q10, a naturally occuring substance
Cori Cycle	The cycle in carbohydrate metabolism consisting of the conversion of glycogen to lactic acid in muscle, diffusion of the lactic acid into the bloodstream which carries it to the liver where it is converted into glycogen, and the breakdown of liver glycogen to glucose which is transported to muscle by the bloodstream and reconverted into glycogen
Cornsilk	Reduces painful symptoms and swelling due to several inflammatory conditions, such as cystitis, hepatitis, oligouria, pyelitis, and all edematous conditions. Cornsilk is a diuretic
Coronary Heart Disease	- Heart ailment caused by narrowing of the coronary arteries (arteries that supply oxygen and nutrients directly to the heart muscle). Coronary heart disease is caused by atherosclerosis, which decreases the blood supply to the heart muscle. The inadequate supply of oxygen rich blood and nutrients damages the heart muscle and can lead to chest pain, heart attack, and death
Coronary Ligament	The folds of peritoneum connecting the posterior surface of the liver and the diaphragm
Correlation	Association
Correlation, Pearson r|Pearson r Correlation	A statistical technique used to assess the magnitude and the direction of the relationship between two variables. Values of the Pearson r can range between -1 and +1. The continuum of -1 to 0 indicates the degree of strength of an inverse relationship. The continuum of 0 to +1 indicates the degree of strength of a positive relationship. A Pearson r of 0 indicates no linear relationship. For example, bicycle helmet use and bicycle accident head injury are negatively correlated; asbestos exposure and cumulative incidence of mesothelioma are positively correlated <BR>
Corriander	See Cilantro
Corticosteroid	Used mainly as an anti-inflammatory drug
Corticosteroids	Medicines such as cortisone and hydrocortisone. These medicines reduce irritation from Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. They may be taken either by mouth or as suppositories
Costa	Ribs
Cota	Herb served as a beverage tea and used to treat high blood pressure. Also known as thela sperma gricilis, hohoysi, chiliweh and Navajo Tea
Coumadin	An oral drug for preventing pathological clotting of blood in blood vessels
Counterirritant	Drug used to produce superficial inflammation of the skin in order to relieve deeper inflammation
Course Of Infection	Stages that an infection goes through from the time it appears at the fist symptom, thru treatment, to conclusion
Coxalgia	Hip pain
CPH	Chronic Persistent Hepatitis
CPK	Creatine Phosphokinase, an enzyme that elevates in the blood when a heart attack occurs, used as a confirmation of a heart attack and as a gauge of damage
CPR	Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
CR	Colon Resection, Colorectal
Crampbark	Muscle and nervous relaxant for cramping pains. Especially helpful with cramping of PMS and the menstrual period
Cranberry	Vaccinium Mactocarpon. The American cranberry has been shown to provide an undesirable growth medium for bacteria in the urinary tract. Specifically, it has been shown that cranberry constituents appear to inhibit the ability of bacteria to adhere to the cell wall that lines the urinary tract. Commercially prepared cranberry juice beverages are often laden with sugar and high in calories. Therefore, capsules of cranberry extract available in health food stores (<a href="http://naturesresponse.com/">NaturesResponse</A>) are not only more potent, but also less caloric
Cranesbill Root	Also called Alum root. Strong astringent, reduces inflammation of mucous membranes, curbs irritation of hemorrhoidal tissue. Used to restore venous health. Especially powerful astringent for passive bleeding, like that occurs in hematuria, hemotysis and menorrhagia, and has a potent healing effect on the entire gastrointestinal tract
CRC	Colorectal Cancer, Colorectal Carcinoma
Creatine	Amino acid formed by methylation of guanidinoacetic acid and occurring in vertebrate tissues, particularly in muscle. It is excreted in the urine as Creatinine. A waste product in the blood and urine, measurement of which provides a measure of kidney function
Creatine Kinase	Dimeric enzyme that catalyses the formation of ATP from ADP and creatine phosphate in muscle
Creatine Phosphate	Storage compound of vertebrate muscle
Creatine Phosphokinase	Enzyme that is contained in cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle, and smooth muscle. Important test for the laboratory diagnosis of heart attack. Creatine Phosphokinase is released into the bloodstream in increased quantities if muscle has been injured. Creatine Phosphokinase can be fractionated so that specific measurements can be made for blood levels of creatine phosphokinase that comes exclusively from damaged heart muscle
Creatinemia	Excess blood creatine
CREG	Cross-Reactive Antigen Group
Cricothyroidotomy	A procedure used to surgically establish an airway in the patient's throat when intubation isn't possibly because of swelling or bleeding
Crit	(slang) Short for hematocrit
Crohn's disease	Regional Ententis, Ileitis--Chronic recurring inflammatory disease that can affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract but most often affects the colon or ileum
Cross Infection	The passage of infection from individual to another
Crossed Treatments	Two or more study treatments that are used in sequence (e.g., as in a crossover design) or in combination (e.g., as in a factorial treatment structure)
Crossover	Treatment crossover. A patient who does not comply to assigned treatment and begins to adhere to one of the other treatments. Patient may be a drop-in or drop-out, depending on the direction of the crossover
Crossover Design	Crossover treatment design. Patients are given treatments in sequence, and crossover is determined by time, not clinical outcomes
CRS	Colon Rectal Surgery, Colorectal Surgery, Cherry Red Spot, Congenital Rubella Syndrome
Crucifiers	Family of plants that includes collard greens, cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli and others
Crude Death Rate	The number of deaths in a year divided by the population size
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten Syndrome	Portal hypertension with extensive collateral circulation through the paraumbilical veins and abdominal vessels and associated with a vascular bruit over the distended veins. Distinction may be made between the disease (patent umbilical vein with absence of liver disease) and syndrome (paraumbilical vein involvement due to portal hypertension associated with liver cirrhosis)
Cryotherapy	The use of intense cold as a treatment
Cryptococcus Neoformans	A fungus, pathogenic in the immune suppressed, which is acquired via the respiratory tract. Cryptococcosis most frequently causes meningitis, with symptoms of headache and stiff neck
Cryptogenic	Of unknown or obscure cause
Crystalluria	Crystals in the urine
CsA	Cyclosporine A
CSMG	Clinical Site Monitoring Group
CSRC	Clinical Science Review Committee
CT	Colon, Transverse, Computed Tomography
CT or CAT Scan|CAT Scan|CT	An x-ray procedure that uses a computer to produce detailed pictures of organs in the body
CTG	Cholesterol-Triglyceride (ratio)
CTL	Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte. See <a href="bword://Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte-CTL">Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte-CTL</A>
cu	Cubic
Cubic Centimeter (cc)|Cubic Centimeter	Measurement of volume used in specifying or supplying dosage (usually injectable) medicine. cc is the same volume as millilter (mL)
CUC	Chronic Ulcerative Colitis
Cucumber	Cucumis Sativa--Also known as Cowcumber. Dietary value of Cucumber is negligible, there being upwards of 96 % water in its composition <BR>
Culture	The process of growing bacteria or other microorganisms in the laboratory so that organisms can be identified
Culver's Root	Used for liver congestion with accompanying constipation. Should be considered when compounding a formula for the liver, gallbladder, to treat constipation, colitis, gallstones and hepatitis. Used primarily for treating liver disorders and constipation
Cumulative	Increasing
Curative	Curing
Curcumin	Increases the secretion of bile by stimulating the bile duct. Protects the liver by detoxification, stimulating the gall bladder and scavenging free radicals. In conjunction with the adrenal glands, it inhibits both platelet aggregation and the enzymes which induce inflammatory prostaglandins. May also help break down fats and reduce cholesterol. Strong anti-oxidant <BR>
Cut Point	The point or value in an ordered sequence of values that is used to separate those values into two subparts. 2. Subgrouping cut-point
Cutaneous	--Skin-related
CVA	Abbreviation for cerebrovascular accident, i.e. stroke
Cyanosis	Blueness of skin (extremities = peripheral) without or with (= central) mucous membranes such as the lips and mouth
Cyanotic	When a patient's skin and mucous membranes are bluish in color from an inadequate supply of oxygen in the blood
CYC	Cyclophosphamide
Cyclosporine	The immunosuppressive ingredient in Neoral® (cyclosporine capsules and oral solution for microemulsion) and Sandimmune® (cyclosporine), an earlier form of cyclosporine. Neoral® and Sandimmune are not bioequivalent and cannot be used interchangeably without physician supervision
Cyst	An abnormal sac with a membranous lining, containing gas, semisolid material or fluid
Cystic	Cyst-like
Cystic Bile	Gallbladder bile the bile that is held for some time in the gallbladder before moving into the intestine <BR>
Cystic Duct	Duct from the gallbladder that unites with the hepatic duct to form the common bile duct
Cystic Duct Obstruction	Blockage of the tube that allows bile to flow from the gallbladder into the common bile duct and on to the small intestine
Cystic Fibrosis--CF	Inherited disease that affects the exocrine (outward secreting) glands, which include mucous and sweat glands. CF affects the respiratory system, causing difficulty in breathing and susceptibility to respiratory infections also affects the pancreas, causing digestive problems. Its effect on sweat glands can cause salt depletion in hot weather
Cystine	Nonessential amino acid but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. Cystine is a structural component of tissues and hormones. Interconvertible with l-cysteine
Cystine or Cysteine	Nonessential amino acid but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. Sulfur bearing amino acid with antioxidant properties. Important for keratin synthesis, a protein found in skin, hair and nails and is a component of coenzyme A and glutathione. Powerful aid to the body in protecting against radiation and pollution. Can help slow down the aging process, deactivate free radicals and neutralize toxins. Aids in protein synthesis and prevents cellular change
Cytochrome	Respiratory enzyme capable of undergoing alternate reduction and oxidation
Cytochromes	Hemeproteins whose characteristic mode of action involves transfer of reducing equivalents associated with a reversible change in oxidation state of the prosthetic group
Cytokine Substances	Substances than can destroy cells
Cytokine(s)|Cytokine|Cytokines	--Non-antibody proteins secreted by inflammatory leukocytes and some non-leukocytic cells, that act as intercellular mediators. They differ from classical hormones in that they are produced by a number of tissue or cell types rather than by specialized glands. They generally act locally in a paracrine or autocrine rather than endocrine manner. A chemical messenger protein released by certain white blood cells, including macrophages, monocytes or lymphocytes, the cytokines include the interferons, the interleukins, Tumor necrosis factor, and many others. Cytokines produced by lymphatic cells are also called &quotLymphokines"<BR>
Cytolytic	Having a destructive effect on cells, causing them to erupt or burst open
Cytomegalic Inclusion Disease	Any group of diseases caused by cytomegalovirus infection marked by characteristics inclusion bodies in enlarged infected cells
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)|Cytomegalovirus	Any virus of the subfamily Betaherpesvirinae, highly host specific herpesviruses that infect man, monkeys or rodents with the production of unique large cells bearing intranuclear inclusions. Depending upon the age and the immune status of the host, cytomegalovirus can cause a variety of clinical syndromes, collectively known as cytomegalic inclusion disease, although the majority of infections are very mild or subclinical. Also called human herpesvirus
Cytometry	The counting of cells, especially blood cells, using a cytometer (a standardized, ruled glass slide or small glass chamber of known volume)
Cytopenia	A lack of specific cellular components in the blood
Cytoplasm	Part of a cell, The inner substance of a cell contained within the cell membrane other than the nucleus. Jelly like protoplasm or substance that fills the interior spaces of a cell
Cytosine	Pyrimidine base, one of the four basic nucleotides that comprise DNA
Cytostatic	Substance to stop cell growth
Cytotoxic	Cancer drug. An agent or process which is toxic to cells that results in suppression of function or cell death
Cytotoxic Substance	Substances that can destroy cells
Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte-CTL	A lymphocyte that is able to kill foreign cells that have been marked for destruction by the cellular immune system. Cytotoxic T Cells, or killer T cells, are activated by binding to specific epitopes presented by infected cells or other antigen-presenting cells. When activated, CTLs multiply in number and attack the diseased cells like an army attacks its enemy, killing diseased cells
d--Deci	1/10g. Decigram (dg) is a measure of weight; deciliter (dl) is a measure of volume
D&C	Dilation and Curettage
D&V	Diarrhea & Vomiting
D/W	Dextrose in water
D5	Abbreviation for dextrose (glucose) given in a 5 percent normal saline solution
DALM	Dysplasia Associated Lesion or Mass
Damiana	History of use as an aphrodisiac, supposedly able to stimulate the libido of men and women. Said to possess mild sedative qualities, able to induce a state of relaxation and to aid in falling asleep. Often used to treat asthma, bladder infection, diabetes, impotence, and sterility
Dandelion	Taraxacum officinale. Also known as Blowball, Cankerwort, Lion's tooth, Priest's crown, Puffball, Swine snout, White endive, and Wild endive. Dandelion plant comes from the Asteraceae family and has a base of toothy leaves that rises from a thin, hollow stem and is capped by a deep yellow head of ligulate flowers. Has two particularly important uses: Promotes the formation of bile and removes excess water from the body in edemous conditions resulting from liver problems. Infusion of the fresh root is said to be good for gallstones, jaundice, and other liver problems. Also used to treat chronic rheumatism, gout, and stiff joints
Darvocet	Drug (propoxyphene hydrochloride) prescribed for pain
DAT	Diet As Tolerated
Data	(pl. of datum) Factual information, such as measurements, observations, or statistics, which is used as a basis for reasoning, discussion, or calculation
Data & Safety Monitoring Board-DSMB|DSMB|Data & Safety Monitoring Board	A standing committee responsible for periodically reviewing accumulated data for evidence of adverse or beneficial treatment effects during the trial and for initiating recommendations for modification of a study treatment, including termination of the treatment when appropriate. One of the key committees in the organizational structure of a multicenter trial. Usually composed primarily, if not exclusively, of individuals not directly involved in patient care or data collection in the trial
Data Collection Visit	Any visit by a patient to a study clinic that is used for data collection in the trial
Data Dredging	A term used to characterize analysis that are done on an ad hoc basis, without benefit of prestated hypotheses
Data Editing	The process of reviewing data for the purpose of detecting deficiencies or errors in the way they are collected or recorded. The process of detecting deficient or erroneous values on completed data forms
Data Interval	Data classified into equal intervals without an absolute zero point, e.g., IQ of 120 is 60 points higher than an IQ of 60, but this does not necessarily indicate twice as much intelligence
Data Nominal	Data classified into unordered categories, e.g., male/female, diabetes/no diabetes, mammogram-yes/mammogram-no <BR>
Data, Ordinal|Data|Ordinal Data	Data classified into ordered categories, e.g., intensity of pain (+/++/+++/++++), severity of disease (mild/moderate/severe/fatal) <BR>
Database	A collection of data files that are organized in a specified manner, and used in analysis of trials
Datum	Singular of data
DB	Direct Birlirubin. Dead Body
DBP	Vitamin D-binding protein
DBW	Desirable Body Weight
DC	Duodenal Cap, Descending Colon, Dilation Catheter, Discontinuation of treatment
DD	Digestive Disorder
DE	Duodenal Exclusion
Death	When all vital phenomena ceases to existbwithout capability of resuscitation, Expired
Death Receptor	Death receptors detect the presence of extracellular death signals and, in response, they rapidly ignite the cell's intrinsic apoptosis machinery
Debridement	Cleaning an open wound by removing foreign material and dead tissue
-Deca	Preferences meaning ten times, as in decagram, or ten grams
-Deci	Prefix meaning one tenth, as in decigram, or a tenth of a gram
Deciliter	One-tenth of a liter; abbreviation: dl
Decompensation	Failure of compensation, as of the circulation or heart
Decompression, Surgical|Decompression|Surgical Decompression	Surgery performed to relieve the pressure compromising function of an organ
Deep Vein Thrombosis	A blood clot in a deep vein
Defibrillation	The cessation of fibrillation of the cardiac muscle and restoration of a normal rhythm
Deficiency	State or condition of lacking a substance, quality or characteristic that is essential for completion. Deletion
Deficit	Shortfall or Lack
Definitive Host	The host in which a parasite reproduces sexually
Defluxion	Discharge or flowing of fluid matter, as from the nose in catarrh; sometimes used synonymously with inflammation
Deform	Shapeless, Disfigure
Defunct	Deceased, Dead, Depart, Finish
Degenerate	Deteriorate, Worsens, To fall off from the normal quality
Degenerative	Worsening
Degerneration	Deterioration; change from a higher to lower form, especially as in change to less functional or healthy tissue. Deterioration or worsening of a structure or condition
Degradation	Break-down
Degraded Liver	A human liver divided into many lobes
Dehydration	Loss of fluids from the body, often caused by diarrhea. May result in loss of important salts and minerals
Dehydroascorbate	Oxidized form of ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
Delayed Type Hypersensitivity-DTH|DTH|Delayed Type Hypersensitivity	A cell-mediated immune response that produces a cellular infiltrate and edema (swelling), redness and induration (hardness) between 48 and 72 hours after exposure to an antigen
Delirium	Mental disturbance marked by illusions, hallucinations, physical restlessness and inability to make sense. Usually results from a toxic state and lasts a short time
Delta Agent	previously Hepatitis D Virus -- single-stranded circular RNA virus of animals; dependent on hepatitis B virus replication for its expression; involved in chronic liver disease
Delta Infection	Infection with hepatitis delta virus, occurring either simultaneously with or as a superinfection in hepatitis B, whose severity it may increase
Delusional	Having an irrational belief that cannot be changed by a rational argument, often found in schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis
Demarcate	To separate, or to indicate the interface between two areas
Dementia	Losing your mind. Chronic intellectual impairment (loss of mental capacity) with organic origins, that affects a person's ability to function in a social or occupational setting
Demerol	A narcotic painkiller. Trade name for meperidine, a synthetic analgesic often used as a substitute for morphine
Demulcent	Soothing, bland, allaying the irritation of inflamed or abraded surfaces
Demyelinating Disease	Diseases in which the myelin sheath of nerves is destroyed and that often have an autoimmune component
Denaturation	Reversible or irreversible loss of function in proteins and nucleic acids resulting from loss of higher order secondary, tertiary or quaternary structure) produced by nonphysiological conditions of pH, temperature, salt or organic solvents
Dendritic	Branching
Dendritic Cell	A type of antigen-presenting immune cell. Dendritic cells have elongated, tentacle like branches in which they trap foreign objects
Depletion	Removal
Depressant	Drug that reduces exaggerated functional activity of the tissues
Deprivation	Loss of, lack of
Dermal	Relating to the skin
DES	Diffuse Esophageal Spasm
Desensitization	The reduction or abolition of allergic sensitivity or reactions to the specific antigen (allergen)
Desert Tea	Also known as Brigham Young weed, Desert herb, Mormon tea, Squaw tea, and Teamster's tea. Used as a diuretic, febrifuge, and tonic. Also used as a remedy for kidney and bladder problems
Detoxification	Neutralization of or degradation of toxic or other dangerous substances
Detoxify	To change a harmful substance into a safer form
Devil's Claw	Harpagophytum Procumbens. Belongs to the family Pedaliaceae. Has been used for treating a wide variety of conditions. Possesses analgesic, sedative and diuretic properties. Devil's claw has been recommended for treating a wide variety of conditions including diseases of the liver, kidneys, and bladder, as well as allergies, arteriosclerosis, arthritis, climacteric (change of life) problems, gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, heartburn, lumbago, menstrual difficulties, neuralgia, nicotine poisoning, and rheumatism. Reported to help with joint pain while improving vitality in the joints. It is free from side effects and seemingly lacks any appreciable toxicity
Dextrose	Another term for glucose, the simple sugar which results from the complete digestion of many carbohydrates
DG	Diacylglycerol
DH	Diaphragmatic Hernia
DHEA	Dehydroepiandrosterone--Decreases the stickiness of platelets, small particles in the blood that often clump together and cause heart attacks and strokes. Shown to be helpful in Cancer, Alzheimer's disease, Chronic fatigue syndrome, Multiple Sclerosis, Memory loss, and Parkinson's disease. Increases the level of estrogen in women and testosterone in men to levels found in younger men and women
DHHS	Dept. of Health and Human Services
DI	Distal Intestine
Dia	(prefix)- through; between
Diabetes	Disease characterized by increased urination. Usually refers to diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes Mellitus	Condition characterized by abnormally high blood sugar due to insufficient insulin activity
Diabetic Keto Acidosis	An illness in which increased acidity of the blood is caused by the breakdown products (ketones) of fat metabolism, because of a shortage of Insulin
Diabetic Neuropathy	A combined type of nerve damage involving sensory and motor components, typically symmetrical and involving autonomic nerves (serving the blood vessels and internal organs), seen frequently in older diabetic patients
Diagnosis	Determination of the nature of a disease or condition or the distinguishing of one disease or condition from another. Assessment may be made through physical examination, laboratory tests, or the like, and may be assisted by computerized programs designed to enhance the decision-making process
Diagnostic Errors	Incorrect diagnoses after clinical examination or technical diagnostic procedures
Diagnostic Imaging	Use of x-ray or ultrasound pictures of the body organs to make diagnoses
Diagnostic Techniques, Digestive System|Diagnostic Techniques|Digestive System	Methods and procedures for the diagnosis of diseases or dysfunction of the digestive system or its organs or demonstration of their physiological processes
Diagnostic Tests, Routine|Diagnostic Tests|Routine Diagnostic Tests	Diagnostic procedures, such as laboratory tests and x-rays, routinely performed on all individuals or specified categories of individuals in a specified situation, e.g., patients being admitted to the hospital. These include routine tests administered to neonates
Dialysis	Procedure to filter blood for patients with kidney failure, also used to remove absorbed toxins from overdosing and poisoning
Diaphoresis	Sweating
Diaphragm	Muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest
Diarrhea	Abnormal increase in the frequency of intestinal evacuations characterized by their fluid consistency
Diastolic	Part of blood pressure. The bottom of two blood pressure numbers, which measures blood pressure when the heart is at rest
Diathesis	Susceptibility to disease
DIC	Abbreviation for disseminated intravascular coagulation (no blood clotting). In many hospitals, ER personnel also interpret DIC to mean "death is coming" since disseminated intravascular coagulation usually means death is imminent
Dictionary	A device for starting futile arguments over definitions
Dietary Cholesterol	Cholesterol that is in the food you eat. It is present only in foods of animal origin, not in foods of plant origin. Dietary cholesterol, like dietary saturated fat, tends to raise blood cholesterol, which increases the risk for heart disease
Dietary Fats, Unsaturated|Unsaturated Dietary Fats	Unsaturated fats or oils used in foods or as a food
Dietary Fiber	Indigestible, nonstarch material, such as pectins, hemicellulose, plant gums, celluloses, found in the cell walls of plants. Found in a wide variety of plant foods, including cereals and whole grain breads, vegetables and fresh fruits, and nuts. Because dietary fiber resists digestion in the gastrointestinal tract, it accounts for a significant portion of the solid matter in bowel movements
Differential	Related to White Blood cell Count, the proportions of the different varieties
Differential Diagnosis	Diagnosis made by ruling out many disorders. The patient usually presents with symptoms that can be shared by many conditions. For example, chest pain can be caused by many diseases or conditions, and each one must be ruled out to arrive at the correct diagnosis
Differential Equation	The mathematical formulation corresponding to a continuous model; an equation involving derivatives
Differentiated, Well|Differentiated|Well Differentiated	Referring to malignancy, possessing histological characteristics of the originating tissues - usually suggesting less pathological aggression
Diffuse	Scattered, widespread, not limited to one tissue or spot, disperse
Diffusion	To spread out evenly, as in a liquid
Diffusion	Spreading
Digestion	Process of breaking down food into simpler chemical compounds that are capable of being absorbed by the intestine
Digestive Aids	Enzymatic aid in the digestion of proteins, carbohydrates and fats. Helps promote intestinal health. Most commonly used digestive aids are hydrochloric acid, pancreatin and enzyme preparations. Without proper digestion, the molecules that have not been ingested completely can be inappropriately absorbed into the systemic circulation, causing various diseases and the development of food allergies
Digestive Physiology	Functions and activities of the digestive system as a whole or of any of its parts
Digestive Tract	Organs that process food and then store and dispose of the waste products of food. The digestive tract includes the mouth, esophagus, stomach, liver, small and large intestines, and rectum
Dilation	Condition of being stretched out, or distended beyond normal size. Dilation is an increase in the diameter of a segment of a hollow organ such as the intestine
Dill Seed	Used as a digestive aid, eases colic, halt diarrhea, prevent flatulence. Preservative
Direct Life Cycle	A life cycle in which a parasite is transmitted directly from one host to the next without an intermediate host or vector of another species
Direct Patient Contact	Patient contacts that are initiated by the study clinic for the purpose of patient recruitment or data collection and that are directed at specified patients without any reliance on interviewing persons, agencies, institutions, or generalized advertising campaigns to make contacts
Disaster Protocol Color Coding -	The following color tags are used to immediately triage patients during a mass casualty event: Green is walking wounded; yellow is urgent; red is critical; black is DOA (Dead On Arrival)
Discrete Variable	A variable is capable of assuming only certain values over a defined range
Disease	The debilitating effects on a host of infection by a parasite
Disinfection	Destroy or render harmless pathogenic (disease-causing) microbes in or on an inert substance
Dissection	Identification, isolation and surgical removal
Disseminate	Scatter
Disseminated	Spread throughout the body
Dissociation	Separation
Distal	Further from central. Farthest away from the midline, trunk heart, or other reference points
Distal Pulse	The pulse farthest from the heart
Distension	Enlarging. Visible increase in the waistline. Bloating or swelling of the abdomen
Distomatosis	Infestation with or disease caused by digenetic trematode worms, such as liver rot
Distribution	The pattern by which parasite numbers are partitioned amongst available hosts
Diuresis	More urine than normal
Diuretic	Drug used to increase urine output, thereby cleansing the excretory system
Divalent	Having a chemical valence of two
Diverticula	Plural of diverticulum
Diverticulitis	Condition in which diverticula become inflamed. Inflammation of the colon
Diverticulosis	Condition in which small sacs (diverticula) form in the wall of the colon. This condition is common among older people
Diverticulum	Small sac that forms on the wall of a hollow organ (usually the colon). The plural form is diverticula. The liver is an anterior diverticulum of the intestine
dl	Deciliter, one tenth of a liter
DLC	Dual Lumen Catheter
DLPA	--(D.L-Phenylalanine) 50-50 mixture of d-phenylalanine and l-phenylalanine. May help alleviate chronic pain by increasing endorphin activity (the body s natural painkillers). Phenylalinine is the precursor of tyrosine, and hence of dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine, all of which require Vitamins B6 and C for their biochemical conversion processes. Phenylalinine is also an essential acid required by the thyroid for normal function. Used in several ways: as a pain control, antidepressant, to improve memory, concentration and mental alertness, treat symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, to reduce symptoms of multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease, and to treat the depigmentation of the skin condition known as Vitiligo<BR>
DM	Duodenal Mucosa
dms	Double vision
DMSO|Dimethyl Suloxide	Dimethyl Suloxide-Used to relieve pain, reduce inflammation, diminish swelling, encourage healing, and restore normal function. Typically used for a variety of disorders, including arthritis, cancer, mental retardation, stroke, and various sports injuries
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic Acid, The genetic material which determines a cell's activities. It carries the cell's genetic code. DNA is used to store the genetic information of all living creatures, with the exception of the RNA viruses. The carrier of genetic information in the nucleus of cells. It determines the structure, function and behavior of the cell. The blueprint
DNA Amplification	The use of enzymes in making millions or billions of copies of a single DNA sequence (see <a href="bword://PCR">PCR</A>)
DNA Annealing	The reformation of double stranded DNA from thermally denatured DNA. The rate of reassociation depends upon the degree of repetition and is slowest for unique sequences (this is the basis of the Cot value
DNA Binding Protein	Proteins that interact with DNA, typically to pack or modify the DNA for example histones or to regulate gene expression, transcription factors. Among those proteins that recognize specific DNA sequences, there are a number of characteristic conserved motifs believed to be essential for specificity
DNA Diagnosis	The use of DNA polymorphisms to detect the presence of a disease gene
DNA Excision	The removal of a damaged segment of a DNA molecule by a group of DNA repair enzymes in order to repair the molecule
DNA Fingerprint	The unique pattern of DNA fragments identified by Southern hybridisation (using a probe that binds to a polymorphic region of DNA) or by polymerase chain reaction (using primers flanking the polymorphic region)
DNA Gene	Any of a number of genes found in the bacteria Escherichia coli which makes proteins that are essential for DNA replication
DNA Library	Genomic Library. A collection of DNA molecules, derived from restriction fragments that have been cloned in vectors, that includes all or part of the genetic material of an organism
DNA Ligase	Enzyme involved in DNA replication
DNA Ligation	The joining of two DNA strands by their ends with a phosphodiester bond
DNA Melting	Denaturation of a DNA molecule with heat. The double-stranded molecule breaks up into two single-stranded molecules as a result of heat
DNA Methylation	Process by which methyl groups are added to certain nucleotides in genomic DNA
DNA Modification	variety of chemical changes made to a DNA molecule just after it has been replicated. An example is DNA methylation
DNA Polymerase	Any of several polymerases that promote replication or repair of DNA usually using single-stranded DNA as a template. Enzymes involved in template directed synthesis of DNA from deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates. I, II and III are known in E. coli, III appears to be most important in genome replication and I is important for its ability to edit out unpaired bases at the end of growing strands. Animal cells have and polymerases, with apparently responsible for replication of nuclear DNA and for replication of mitochondrial. All these function with a DNA strand as template. Retroviruses possess a unique DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) that uses an RNA template
DNA Polymerase i	an enzyme that aids in DNA replication. It has the following 3 functions: 1. polymerizes in the 5(r) to 3(r) direction on single-stranded template. 2. degrades single or double-stranded DNA from a free 5 (r) end
DNA Polymerase ii	An enzyme that aids in DNA replication. It has a number of different functions, including the repair of ultraviolet radiation damaged DNA
DNA Polymerase iii	An enzyme that aids in DNA replication. It has a number of different functions, such as: proofreading newly replicated DNA, removing nucleotides from the 3' end of the strand one by one, and binding nucleotides from the 5' end of the strand
DNA Polymerisation	The making of a DNA molecule from nucleotide monomers by linking them together in a long chain (a polymer)
DNA Probe	A small piece of nucleic acid that has been labeled with a radioactive isotope, dye, or enzyme and is used to locate a complementary nucleotide sequence or gene on a DNA molecule
DNA-Protein Interaction	Any complex that forms between a protein molecule and DNA. Examples are nucleosomes (structures formed for the purpose of DNA storage) and any gene regulatory protein (a protein which regulates transcription by binding to a regulatory region on the DNA)
DNA Repair	Enzymic correction of errors in DNA structure and sequence that protects genetic information against environmental damage and replication errors
DNA Replication	The process whereby a copy of a DNA molecule is made and thus the genetic information it contains is duplicated. The parental double stranded DNA molecule is replicated semi conservatively, i.e. each copy contains one of the original strands paired with a newly synthesised strand that is complementary in terms of AT and GC base pairing. Though in this sense conceptually simple, mechanistically a complex process involving a number of enzymes
DNA to the protein	forming system of the cell
DNR	Abbreviation for do not resuscitate, which is requested or ordered for terminally ill patients
DOA	Dead On Arrival
Docks	Also known as Great Water Dock, Patience Dock, Red Dock, Round-leaved, Sharp-pointed Dock, and Yellow Dock. <I>Patience Dock</I> is considered good for jaundice, also has a gentle laxative action. <I>Round-leaved Dock</I> was formerly given for the cure of boils. <I>Sharp-pointed Dock</I> , the root has been used in drinks and decoctions for scurvy and as a general blood cleanser, and used for outward application to cutaneous eruptions, in the form of an ointment, made by beating it up with lard. <I>Yellow Dock </I>is applicable to all the purposes for which the other species are used. The root has laxative, alterative and mildly tonic action, and can be freely used as a tonic and laxative in bilious complaints, rheumatism, and as an astringent in piles, bleedings of the lungs, etc. Mostly prescribed for diseases of the blood, from a spring eruption, to scurvy, scrofula and chronic skin diseases. Also useful in jaundice and as a tonic to the stomach and the system in general. <I>Red Dock</I>, or <I>Water Dock</I>, has properties very similar to those of the Yellow Dock. Its powers as a tonic are, perhaps more marked than the previous species. For internal use, it is given in an infusion, in wineglassful doses. Externally it is used as an application for eruptive and scorbutic diseases, ulcers and sores, used for cleansing ulcers in affections of the mouth, etc. As a powder, it has cleansing and detergent effect upon the teeth. <I>Great Water Dock</I> is strongly astringent, and powdered makes a good dentifrice. The astringent qualities of the root render it good in case of diarrhea, the seeds (as with the other Docks) having been used for the same purpose. The green leaves are said to be an excellent application for ulcers of the eyes
Dogsbane	Apocynum Androsaemifolium--Also known as Bitter Root, Milkweed, or Fly-Trap. One of the digitalis group of cardiac tonics, Apocynum, is the most powerful in slowing the pulse, and its action on the vaso-motor system is also very strong. Being rather irritant to mucous membranes, it may cause nausea and catharsis. It is a powerful hydragogue, helpful in dropsy's due to heart failure, and in the ascites of hepatic cirrhosis. Also used as an alterative in rheumatism, syphilis and scrofula. The absorption in the gastrointestinal tract being very irregular, <I>the dosage and patient must be carefully watched and guarded</I>
DOH	Department Of Health
Dong Quai	Angelica Sinensis--One of the most important female tonic remedies in Chinese medicine, Dong Quai is used to provide energy and regulate female hormones. Main active ingredient is ligustilide which has been shown to normalize uterine contractions, improve peripheral circulation, relax blood vessels and act as a general blood tonic. Used in the treatment of female disorders such as menstrual cramps, premenstrual syndrome, and to relieve symptoms associated with menopause. Also said to purify the blood and act as a mild laxative. Dong quai also contains compounds that act to stimulate the central nervous system, supporting its use as a mild energizer. <I>Certain people may experience a form of dermatitis caused by compounds that promote photosensitivity. (Interferon) Pregnant women, and women with excessive menstrual flow, should avoid using this herb altogether</I>
Dopamine	A chemical transmitter, naturally occurring in nerves, and used in a synthetic form to sustain blood pressure
Dormancy	Latent
Dormant	At rest; clinically silent.
Dorsal	The back of a body part, with reference to the standard anatomical convention
Dose Ranging	The establishment of the optimal dosage of a new drug by repeated trials of varying dosages
Dose/Dosage	Dose is the amount or quanity to be given at one time, or the total amount to be given. Dosage implies a regimen, the regulated administration of individual doses. Usually expressed as a quanity per unit of time
Double Blind	A procedure in a clinical trial for issuing and administering treatment assignments by code number in order to keep study patients and all members of the clinic staff, especially those responsible for patient treatment and data collection, from knowing the assigned treatments. Any condition in which two different groups of people are purposely denied access to a piece of information in order to keep that information from influencing some measurement, observation, or process
Double-Blind Study/Trial|Double-Blind Study|Double-Blind Trial	Persons testing a new therapy for safety and effectiveness can be influenced by their preconceived ideas or desires. Similarly, patients often report improvement from treatments if they expect the treatment to work, a phenomenon known as the placebo effect. To prevent these biases from influencing results, controlled trials often use codes that hide knowledge of which treatment is being given from both the investigator and the patient until after the study is complete
Double Helix	Structure of DNA described and discovered by Crick and Watson
DP	Diminutive Polyp
DR	Diffuse Redness
Dronabinol-Marinol	A synthetic form of the active ingredient in marijuana, used to increase hunger and ameliorate nausea in persons with severe involuntary weight loss
Drop Out	A patient enrolled in a clinical trial who is either unwilling or unable to return to the study clinic for regular follow-up visits
Dropsy	Abnormal accumulation of fluid in the body; edema
Drug Allergy	Sensitivity or Hypersensitivity to a drug or chemical, with the potential for causing harmful consequences
Drug Induced Hepatitis	Inflammation of the liver that is caused by a drug. Some medications may cause inflammation of the liver as a drug side effect or drug toxicity. Drugs that are known to cause hepatitis include acetaminophen, erythromycin, halothane, isoniazid, methyldopa, and oral contraceptives
Drug Side Effect	An often undesirable effect that occurs in association with the use of a particular medication. Examples of common drug side effects include: dizziness, headache, nausea, sedation, vomiting, and weakness. Drug side effects that occur in 1%, or more, of patients taking a particular medication are considered to be causally related to the use of that medication
Drug Toxicity	The systemic effects of a drug that are related to the overall level of the medication in the bloodstream. Drug toxicity may occur with overdosage of a medication, accumulation of the drug in the body over time, or the inability of the patient's body to eliminate the drug
Drug Trial	A clinical trial in which the test treatments are drugs
DSHEA	<I>Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act</I>, A bill passed by Congress in 1994. It recognizes the valuable role nutritional supplements play in promoting health and opens the way for consumers to obtain the information they need to make health dietary choices
DTH	Delayed Type Hypersensitivity
DTP	Diphtheria-Tetanus-Pertussis (toxoids/vaccine)
DTR	Registered Dietetic Technician
DU	Duodenal Ulcer
Dubin-Johnson Syndrome	An inherited form of chronic jaundice (a yellow tint to the eyes and skin) there is no known cause
Duct	Tube of channel especially one that conveys the secretions of a gland. Small enclosed channel conducting any fluid
Ductile	Can be reshaped or drawn without breaking
Ductule	Small duct
Ductus	Duct
Ductus Choledochus	Common bile duct
Ductus Venous	A vein passing through the liver and connecting the left umbilical vein with the inferior vena cava of the fetus, losing its circulatory function after birth, and persisting as the ligamentum venosum of the liver
Duffy Blood-Group System	Blood group consisting mainly of the antigens Fy(a) and Fy(b), determined by allelic genes, the frequency of which varies profoundly in different races; amorphic genes are common
Duo	combining form meaning two
Duodenitis	An irritation of the first part of the small intestine/duodenum
Duodenum	Gut, first part of the small intestine. The first, shortest, and widest part of the small intestine that in humans is about 10 inches (25 centimeters) long and that extends from the pylorus to the undersurface of the liver where it descends for a variable distance and receives the bile and pancreatic ducts and then bends to the left and finally upward to join the jejunum near the second lumbar vertebra
Dys--(prefix)	Difficult; bad; abnormal
Dyscrasia	Bad temper
Dysentery	Inflammation of the colon, marked by intense diarrhea with the passage of small amounts of mucus and blood, usually caused by pathogenic bacteria or protozoans
Dysfunction	Malfunction
Dyspepsia	Condition of disturbed digestion characterized by nausea, heartburn, pain, and gas. Another name for indigestion
Dysphagia	Difficulty swallowing, usually caused by blockage or injury to the esophagus
Dysphasia	Impairment of speech
Dysplasia	The abnormal development of tissue. In disease, the alteration of size, shape, and organization of adult cells
Dyspnea	Difficult or labored breathing. Shortness of breath
Dysregulation	Refers to interruption or interference of normal process(es)
Dystonia	Spasmotic movements due to disordered tonicity of muscle
E Antibody	Carriers who stop producing E-Antigen sometimes produce e-antibodies. The clinical signficance of this result is uncertain
E Antigen	A viral protein that is secreted by Hepatitis B Virus infected cells. The presence of the E Antigen indicates high levels of virus in the blood which increases a carrier's infectiousness to others with whom they come into close contact with. If this test is negative, yet a person is known to be HBsAg positive, then it indicates low levels of virus in the blood, which decreases one's infectiousness
EA	Enternal Alimentation, Enteroasnastomosis
Ear Coning	A centuries-old way to relieve earache, to fight infection, and remove toxins and wax from inside the ear. (<a href="http://naturesresponse.com/earcandles.html">Nature's Response</A>)
Early Satiety	Feeling full before completing a normal sized meal. Definition of 'normal' varies with each individual
EAS	Enternal Anal Sphincter
EB	Esophageal Body
EBC	Esophageal Balloon Catheter
EBV	Epstein-Barr Virus
EC	Escherichia Coli, Esophageal Carcinoma
Ecchymosis	Bruising
ECF	Extracellular Fluid
ECG	Electrocardiogram
Echinacea	Echinacea Purpurea--Commonly known as the purple coneflower, is used by American Indians as the remedy of choice for infections and animal bites. Research has uncovered active constituents that have a profound effect on proper immune function- particularly its polysaccharides and echinacosides. Used extensively by herbalists and alternative health care providers to boost the immune system, help speed wound healing, reduce inflammations, treat colds and flu, and fight infections. Echinacea helps to activate macrophages, key immune system elements that are directly involved in the destruction of bacteria, viruses, other infectious agents and cancer cells. Reports indicate that Echinacea enhances natural killer cell activity, another important component in the immune system. Echinacea is recommended for use periodically for one or two weeks at a time, do not use continuously, because the body becomes accustomed to it, and it loses effectiveness. This effectiveness is restored in a week or two. If you are pregnant or nursing, consult your physician before using this product. If you have kidney disease, restrict usage to ten days (maximum) to avoid a possible imbalance in excreted minerals
Echinococcosis, Hepatic|Hepatic Echinococcosis	Helminth infection of the liver caused by Echinococcus granulosus or Echinococcus multilocularis
Echography	Scan
Eck Fistula	An artificial anastomosis between the portal vein and inferior vena cava by which blood from the intestinal region is diverted from the liver to flow directly to the heart
Ecological Epidemiology	A branch of epidemiology which views disease as a result of the ecological interactions between populations of hosts and parasites
ectasis	(suffix)-To stretch; dilate
ectomy	Suffix meaning excision of structure or organ
Ectopic	In the wrong place. In an abnormal position. Occurring at an abnormal time
Edema	Accumulation of an abnormally large amount of fluid in body tissues, causing swelling of the involved area. Edema from liver disease is most often seen in the lower legs, feet, and around the eyes. It can be caused by portal hypertension and is associated with cirrhosis. Also called Dropsy
EEA	Elemental Enteral Alimentation, End to End Anastomosis
EEG	Electroencephalogram
EFA	Essential Fatty Acids
EFC	Endogenous Fecal Calcium
Efficacy	Index of the potency of a drug or disease treatment
Effusion	Escape of fluid, Bodily fluid pathologically accumulated
EG	Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis, Esophagogastrectomy
EGD	Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
EGG	Electrofastrogram, Electrogastrography
EH	Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma
EHBDA	Extrahepatic Bile Duct Atresia
EHC	Enterohepatic Circulation
EHEC	Enterohemorrhagic, Escherichia Coli
EHO	Extrahepatic Obstruction
EIA	Enzyme Immunoassay
EIEC	Enteroinvasive , Escherichia Coli
Elastin	Protein that is similar to collagen and is the chief constituent of elastic fibers
Elder	Used for any catarrhal inflammation of the upper respiratory tract such as hayfever and sinusitis. Elder flowers are ideal for the treatment of colds and influenza. The leaves are used for bruises, sprains, and wounds. Elder leaves may be useful compounded in ointments for tumors. Elder berries are useful in treating chronic rheumatism. For colds and fevers, Elder may be used with Peppermint, Yarrow or Hyssop. For influenza, combine with Bonset. For catarrhal states, mix it with Golden Rod
Elderberry	Sambucus Racemosa. The elder is a common shrub bearing nutrient dense black berries and small white flowers. Traditional use of this plant includes both the berry and the flower. Elderberry juice has a long tradition as a refreshing drink that enhances resistance and health. The berries are particularly rich in the important class of antioxidant compounds called polyphenols
Elecampane	Used for its anti-tussive, diaphoretic, expectorant, hepatic, and anti-microbial properties. Used for irritating bronchial coughs, especially in children. Also used for treatment of asthma and bronchial asthma, bronchial and gastric catarrh, chronic bronchitis, pertussis, pneumoconiosis, silicosis, tuberculosis, emphysematous conditions, and chronic cough <BR>
Elective	Not urgent
Electrocardiogram	A recording of the electrical activity of the heart
Electrolyte Analysis	Tests the basic chemicals in the body; sodium, potassium, chloride, and bicarbonate
Electrolyte(s)|Electrolyte|Electrolytes	Mineral salts that are involved in nerve signal transmission and muscle contractions. generally refers to the dissolved form of a mineral such as sodium, potassium, magnesium, chlorine, etc.
Electrophysiology	Any method of recording electrical events in living organisms
ELISA	Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay--One of the leading biotechnology analysis and testing techniques. Provides detailed information on the amount (level) of antibodies in the bloodstream. Visualisation is typically made possible by enzyme induced color formation
Elixir	Sweetened aromatic preparation, about 25% alcohol, used as a vehicle for medicinal substances for its flavoring or medicinal qualities
ELT	Endoscopic Laser Therapy
EM	Esophageal Manometry
Embolectomy	The surgical removal of blood clot from arteries or veins
Emboli	Solid particles, usually a fragments of clotted blood or fatty deposits, carried along in the bloodstream
Embolism	The dissemination through blood vessels and lodgment of harmful substances, a blood clot, in remote locations, compromising the health of adjacent tissues
Embolus	Blood clot
Embrocation	Liniment
EMD	Esophageal Mobility Disorder
Emesis	Vomiting
Emetic	Drug used to help induce vomiting
EMG	Electromyography, Electromyogram
emia	(suffix)-Blood
Empiric	Based on experience
Empyema	Collection of pus
EMS	Emergency Medical Services
EMT	Emergency Medical Technician
Emu Oil	Used for relief from insect bites and stings, burns and sunburns, cuts, scrapes, bruises, chapped lips and other minor skin irritations. Also used effectively to treat blemishes, diaper rash, hair care, hemorrhoids, Poison Ivy, scars, stretch marks, and warts. Shows anti-inflammatory effects on skin tissue. Because it penetrates the skin so quickly and deeply, provides fast, temporary relief from soreness, muscle aches, and leg cramps. Excellent skin hydrating product. Helps promote natural healing, rejuvenate dry skin, and freshen skin tissue. Readily alleviates the pain, in about 2 to 3 minutes, dramatically reduces tissue scarring &amp; blistering.
EN	Enteral Nutrition, Enema
Encephalopathy	Brain disease, medical term used to describe a variety of brain function abnormalities that may affect some patients who have liver disease. Symptoms can include insomnia, confusion, disorientation and may lead to coma
End Stage	Being or occurring in the final stages of a terminal disease or condition
End Stage Liver Disease	Stage when liver disease has progressed to the point where the liver can no longer carry out its functions properly
Endemic	Term to describe levels of infection which do not exhibit wide fluctuations through time in a defined place. For microparasites like measles, the term is used slightly differently to indicate an infection which can persist in a population in the long term without needing to be reintroduced from outside. Occuring continuously in a population
Endemic Fadeout	Parasite extinction occurring because endemic levels are so low that it is possible for small stochastic fluctuations to remove all parasites
Endo	(prefix)-Within
Endocrine	Internal secretion related
Endocytosis	Process in which cells take in fluids or other large molecules
Endogenous	Without obvious external cause
Endoplasmic Reticulum	Extensive network of fine parallel membranes interspersed throughout the cytoplasm of the cell, used for the transport of substances inside of a cell
Endoscope	Thin, lighted tube through which a doctor can look at tissues inside the body
Endoscope Papillotomy	After endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography has been performed, a catheter (tube) with a wire is placed into the bile duct draining into the duodenum so that gallstones can be removed from the common bile duct
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio Pancreatography	Radiographic imaging of the bile ducts and pancreatic duct after the introduction of radio-opaque dye into the ampulla of Vater through an instrument (endoscope) passed down the throat, gullet, and stomach into the duodenum
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography|ERCP	ERCP--Diagnostic examination performed by a physician through an endoscope. A catheter is placed through the endoscope into the opening where the bile ducts and pancreas enter the duodenum and dye is injected. An x-ray is taken during the injection to permit the physician to see the system of ducts
Endoscopic,  Surgical Procedures|Endoscopic Surgical Procedures	Surgery performed with the use of an endoscope. Operative techniques may include use of lasers or electrocautery. The procedure is guided via visualization using fiber optics, video and other remote transmission. Advantages are briefer anesthesia and operative periods, reduced recovery time, shorter hospitalization, and generally less trauma for the patient
Endoscopy	Internal examination using a fiber optic tube
Endoscopy, Gastrointestinal	Visual examination of the gastrointestinal tract by means of a fiberoptic endoscope. Used to localize, identify, and photograph pathologic alterations, obtain biopsy material and perform other surgical interventions, also used for the delivery of medication <BR>
Enema	Rectal injection of liquid, used to encourage evacuation of the bowels
ENT	Ear, Nose, and Throat
Enter(o)|Enter	(prefix)-Intestine
Enteritis	Small intestine inflammation
Enterohepatic	Intestine and liver related
Enterostomal Therapy--ET--Nurse|ET Nurse|Enterostomal Therapy Nurse	Nurse skilled in caring for and teaching ostomy patients
Envelope	A lipid membrane enveloping a virus particle
Enzyme	Chemical substance that while remaining unchanged, helps a chemical reaction to take place. At the end of this reaction, the enzyme can help in other reactions of the same kind. Protein in the body that initiate and accelerate chemical reactions. Digestive enzymes act in the mouth, stomach, and intestines to break down food into simpler compounds usable for producing energy or for building various body substances. In case of enzyme deficiency, digestive enzymes, unlike other kinds, can readily be used by the body when provided by an external source. Alfalfa, Apple, Artichoke (leaves and root), Barley (malt), Carline thistle, Cascara sagrada (bark), Castor bean (oil), Dandelion (root), Papaya, Peppermint, Soybeans, Wood sorrel, Yellow bedstraw, all contain Enzymes
Enzyme Immunoassay|EIA	(EIA)--One of the leading biotechnology analysis and testing techniques. Provides detailed information on the amount of antibodies in the bloodstream
Eosinophilia	Increase in white blood cells
EPEC	Enteropathogenic
Ephedra	Also called Ma-huang. Used to treat bronchial asthma, aching joints and bones, cold and flu, chills, edema, headache, lack of perspiration, nasal congestion, and cough and wheezing
Epi	(prefix)-Upon; over
Epidemic	A rapid increase in the levels of an infection. Typical of the microparasitic infections (with long lasting immunity and short generation times) an epidemic is usually heralded by an exponential rise in the number of cases in time and a subsequent decline as susceptible numbers are exhausted. Epidemics may arise from the introduction of a novel pathogen (or strain) to a previously unexposed (naive) population or as a result of the regrowth of susceptible numbers some time after a previous epidemic due to the same infectious agent
Epidemic Fadeout	Parasite extinction occurring because numbers are so low immediately following an epidemic that it is possible for small stochastic fluctuations to remove all parasites
Epidemiological	Study of epidemics
Epidemiology	The study of patterns of disease in a population. Investigation of the causes of and ways to control epidemic diseases. Especially the factors that influence the incidence, distribution, and control of infectious diseases; the study of disease occurrence in human populations
Epidermis	Outermost, nonvascular layer of skin
Epigastralgia	Pain in the upper abdomen
Epigastric	Related to the upper abdominal area
Episome	Class of genetic elements of bacteria that may exist either as autonomous entities, replicating in the host independent of the bacterial chromosome, or as segments of the bacterial chromosome, replicating with it
Epistaxis	Nosebleed
Epitheliod	Resembling Epithelium
Epitheliod Cell	A macrophage with abundant cytoplasm causing it to resemble an epithelial cell: found in granulomas such as those of tuberculosis
Epithelioma	A form of cancer. A tumor derived from epithelium; usually a skin cancer, occasionally cancer of a mucous membrane
Epithelium	Covering of internal and external body surfaces
Epithelization	The growth of epithelium over a raw surface
Epithelize	To cover or to become covered with Epithelium
Epitope	An epitope is the chemical group which is recognized by the immune system. It is a small fragment (peptide) from an antigen (protein). The cellular immune response (CTL and HTL) is activated when CTL and HTL recognize epitopes from disease-causing antigens
Epstein	Barr Virus--A herpes virus which causes glandular fever
ER	Epigastric Region, Esophageal Rupture, Emergency Room
ERBD	Endoscopic Retrograde Biliary Drainage
ERC	Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatogram, Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Eroded	Having a shallow or superficial ulceration
Eructation	Belching
Eruption	Breaking out
Erythema	Redness of the skin occurring in patches of variable shape & size. Can be caused by many different things, Heat, Ultraviolet Rays, certain drugs, or ionizing radiation
Erythema Nodosum	Skin eruption, usually on the anterior surface of the legs, below the knees, of blue to pink, tender nodules that appear in crops, often associated with joint pain, seen more in women
Erythema Threshold	The amount of radiation that causes redness of the skin
Erythematous	Relating to, or causing, erythema
Erythr, Erythro|Erythr|Erythro	Combining form meaning Red, Erythrocyte
Erythrocyte Aggregation	Aggregation of erythrocytes probably resulting from changes in the negative surface charge (zeta potential) of the cells caused by the dielectric effect of proteins in the surrounding plasma, especially asymmetric macromolecules like fibrinogen and gamma-globulin
Erythrocyte Aging	Senescence of the red blood cell. Lacking the organelles that make protein synthesis possible, the mature erythrocyte is incapable of self-repair, reproduction, and carrying out certain functions performed by other cells. Average life span of an erythrocyte to 120 days
Erythrocyte Deformability	Ability of erythrocytes to change shape as they pass through narrow spaces, such as the microvasculature
Erythrocyte Indices	Quantification of size and cell hemoglobin content or concentration of the erythrocyte, usually derived from erythrocyte count, blood hemoglobin concentration, and hematocrit. Includes the mean cell volume (MCV), mean cell hemoglobin (MCH), and mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC). Use also for cell diameter and thickness
Erythropoiesis	Red cell production
ES	Endoscopic Sphinceterotomy, Esophagus, External Sphincter
ESO	Esophagus, Esophagoscopy
Esophageal	Related to the esophagus
Esophageal Varices	Varicose veins of the esophagus, which have lost the support of the surrounding tissue and are bulging into the channel of the esophagus, and are irritated by the passage of food. They are almost always due to changes in the liver circulation caused by cirrhosis
Esophagectomy	Operation to remove a portion of the esophagus
Esophagitis	Inflammation of the esophagus
Esophagoscopy	Examination of the esophagus using a thin, lighted instrument. Used to localize, identify, and photograph pathologic alterations, to obtain biopsy material and perform other surgical interventions, and for delivery of medication
Esophagram	Series of x-rays of the esophagus. X-ray pictures are taken after the patient drinks a solution that coats and outlines the walls of the esophagus
Esophagus	The muscular tube through which food passes from the throat to the stomach
ESR	Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate
Essential	Can not be manufactured by the body
Ester	Any of a class of often fragrant compounds that can be represented by the formula RCOOR` and that are usually formed by the reaction between an acid and an alcohol usually with elimination of water
ESV	Esophageal Valve
ET	Endotracheal Tube, Enterostomal Therapy
ETA	Estimated Time of Arrival
ETEC	Enterotoxic, Enterotoxigenic
Ethanol	Grain alcohol; made from sugar, starch, and other carbohydrates by fermentation; has sedative properties
Etiology	The study of the causes of disease
ETOP	Etoposide
Eucalyptus	Used as a topical antiseptic, a gargle for sore throats and an inhalant to relieve asthma, bronchitis, croup and nasal congestion. Relieves congestion, prevents infection, eases muscle soreness. Never ingest eucalyptus oil. Taken internally, it's very poisonous. Fatalities have been reported from taking as little as a teaspoonful. Teas are made only from the leaves. Do not give eucalyptus to children under the age of two
Euphrasia	Proven effective in reducing skin blemishes, clearing bloodshot eyes, and helping with impotence
European Vervain	Also known as Enchanter's plant, Herb of the cross, Holy herb, Juno's tears, Pigeon's grass, Pigeonweed, and Simpler's joy. Used as an astringent, diuretic, emmenagogue, galactagogue, stimulant, tonic, and vulnerary. A decoction is said to be good for eczema and other skin conditions. Also been used for dropsy, jaundice, whooping cough, and kidney and liver problems. An infusion or decoction is used to help heal wounds
EUS	Endoscopic Ultrasonography
Evacuation	Emptying
Evening Primrose	Reduces high blood pressure, Aids in weight loss, helps to treat all skin disorders, multiple sclerosis, arthritis, alcoholism, female disorders such as cramps & heavy bleeding, hot flashes, and many other disorders
EVL	Esophageal Band Ligation
EVS	Esophageal Variceal Sclerotherapy
Ex (o)|Ex|Exo	Out of; away from; outside of
Exacerbation	Worsening
Exanthema	Skin rash
Excipient	Inactive part of drug
Excoriation	Breakdown of skin
Excrete	To discharge wastes from the blood or body tissues
Excretion	Removal of waste, Expelling or getting out of the body
Excretory	Concerned with the process of elimination of waste products through urine and sweat
Exfoliation	Shedding of cells
Exogenous	With an external origin
Expectorant	Substance used to expel mucus from the respiratory tract
Exponential Decay	A decline in which the rate of decay is always proportional to the amount of material remaining; the constant of proportionality is the rate constant
Exponential Growth	An increase in which the rate of growth is always proportional to the amount of material remaining; the constant of proportionality is the rate constant
Extension	Moving apart
External	Situated or occurring on the outside, many anatomical structures formerly called external are now more correctly termed lateral
External Oblique	Lower 8 ribs
Extracellular	Outside cells
Extracorporeal	Outside the body
Extract	Solution representing four to six times the strength of the crude drug. In herbalism, the desired constituents withdrawn from a plant by physical or chemical means or both
Extraction	Removal
Extrahepatic	Situated or originating outside the liver
Extravasation	Escape of blood or fluid into tissue
Extravascular	Outside a vessel
Exudate	Liquid that oozes from an inflamed area
Eyebright	Euphrasia Officinalis--Comes from the family Scrophulariaceae and may be taken as a tea, in a lotion or infusion form or capsules. May be used for conjunctivitis and other eye irritations, but has not been said to have any therapeutic properties for the treatment of eye disease. Useful for eyestrain, eye inflammations, and other eye ailments. Can relieve other symptoms that accompany runny, sore, itchy eyes due to colds or allergies. Considered to be an anti-catarrhal, astringent, and anti-inflammatory. Excellent remedy for problems of the mucous membranes. Internally, it also helps maintain good vision and eye health by supporting the liver among other organs in such a way as to cleanse the blood supply to the eyes. Helpful in acute or chronic inflammations, stinging and weeping eyes as well as over-sensitivity to light <BR>
F	Fat, Fecal
F.	A measurement of temperature commonly used in the U.S.A. See Fahrenheit
FA	Fatty Acid
Factor	A circumstance, fact or influence which usually produces a result. A substance that promotes or functions in a particular physiologic process, such as a coagulation factor
Factor 1	Fibrinogen
Factor D (liver)|Factor D	A poly (thymidine) template stimulatory protein of DNA polymerases; MW 58kDa
Factor II	Prothrombin
Factor III	Thromboplastin
Factor IV	Calcium when it participates in the coagulation of blood
Factor IX	Procoagulant in normal plasma but deficient in the blood of patients with Hemophilia B
Factor V	Essential for rapid conversion of prothrombin to thrombin. A procoagulant in normal plasma but deficient in patients with parahemophilia <BR>
Factor VI	Hypothetical substance believed to be derived from Factor V during coagulation
Factor VII	May be closely related to prothrombin since are both are formed in the liver by action of vitamin K. Stable procoagulant in normal plasma but deficient in the blood of patients with hereditary bleeding disorder
Factor VIII	Procoagulant present in normal plasma but deficient in the blood of patients with hemophilia A
Factor X	Same as Factor VIII
Factor XI	Procoagulant present in normal plasma but deficient in the blood of patients with hereditary bleeding disorders
Factor XII	Factor necessary for rapid coagulation in vitro, apparently not required for hemostasis, present in normal plasma but deficient in the blood of patients with a hereditary bleeding disorder
Factor XIII	Factor present in normal plasma which in the presence of calcium, causes the formation of a highly insoluable fibrin clot resistant to urea or weak acid
Fahrenheit	A measurement of temperature commonly used in the U.S.A. Normal body temperature is considered to be 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit or 37 degrees Celsius. Body temperature can vary 1/2 to 1 degree Fahrenheit above or below 98.6 F. and still be considered "normal." Body temperature varies with many factors including level of activity. To convert a Fahrenheit temperature to Celsius use: C = (F - 32) x 5/9. To convert a Celsius temperature to Fahrenheit use: F = (C x 9/5) + 32
Failure To Thrive	Condition in which an infant does not develop or grow normally
Falciform Ligament	An anteroposterior fold of peritoneum attached to the under surface of the diaphragm and sheath of the rectus muscle and along a line on the anterior and upper surfaces of the liver extending back from the notch on the anterior margin
False Negative Reactions	Negative test results in subjects who possess the attribute for which the test is conducted. The labeling of diseased persons as healthy when screening in the detection of disease
False-Positive	Test result that mistakenly gives a postive reading
False Positive Reactions	Positive test results in subjects who do not possess the attribute for which the test is conducted. The labeling of healthy persons as diseased when screening in the detection of disease
Familial Polyposis	Rare, inherited disease in which many growths (polyps) occur in the colon. People who have this disease have an extremely high risk of developing colon cancer
Fascia	Band of fibrous tissue such as lies deep to the skin or forms an investment for muscles and various other organs of the body
Fasciculated	United into bundles
Fasciculitis	Inflammation of a small bundle of muscle or nerve fibers, usually the latter
Fasciculus	In histology, a bundle of nerves, muscle or tendon fibers separated by connective tissue; as that of muscle fibers, by perimysium. 2. In neurology, a bundle or tract of nerve fibers presumably having common connections and functions
Fasciola Hepatica	Common liver fluke of sheep, oxen, goats, horses, and other herbivorous animals.Occasionally found in the human liver, where it may cause dangerous symptoms by obstructing the biliary passages and by invasion of the liver parenchyma. Several snails of the genus Lymnaea act as invertebrate hosts. Also called Distoma Hepaticum
Fascioliasis	Infection with Fasciola hepatica or F. gigantea
Fast-Fasting	To abstain from all or some foods
Fat	One of the three nutrients that supply calories to our bodies. Fat provides 9 calories per gram, more than twice the number provided by protein or carbohydrates. Along with providing calories, fat helps in absorption of certain vitamins. Small amounts of fat are necessary to keep our bodies functioning normally
Fat-Monounsaturated	Slightly unsaturated fat that is found in the greatest amounts in foods from plants, including canola and olive oil. When it is substituted for saturated fat, monounsaturated fat may help reduce blood cholesterol
Fat-Total	Sum of the saturated, polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats present in food. Mixture of all three are found in varying amounts in most foods
Fatty	Marked by an abnormal deposit of fat
Fatty Acid	Any of a large group of organic acids made up of molecules containing a carboxyl group at the end of a long hydrocarbon chain; the carbon content may vary from C2 to C34
Fatty Liver	Yellow discoloration of the liver due to fatty degeneration of liver parenchymal cells
Fatty Liver, Alcoholic	Fatty liver in alcoholics. It is potentially reversible and may be associated with alcoholic hepatitis or cirrhosis. One affected with fatty infiltration, usually from alcohol abuse, jejunoileal bypass surgery, or occasionally diabetes mellitus; fat is in large droplets and the liver is enlarged but of normal consistency; patients are often asymptomatic but the condition can progress to hepatitis or cirrhosis if the underlying cause is not removed <BR>
FDA--Food and Drug Adminstration	Federal organization that establishes the safety and effectiveness guidelines & rules for drugs & healthcare products
Febrifuge	Substance that reduces or prevents fever; antipyretic
Fecal-Oral Route	Route of transmission which is dependant on the ingestion of fecal matter. Common mode of transmission for Hepatitis types A and E
Feces	Solid body wastes, passed as bowel movements
Feldene	A nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (piroxicam) prescribed for arthritis and other forms of joint and bone inflammation
Femoral Artery	The major artery in the thigh
Fennel	Used to aid digestion, help expel gas. It relaxes muscles in the digestive and reproductive systems. Also used to increase mothers' milk production and promote menstruation. Because of its estrogenic effect, pregnant women should avoid medicinal amounts of the herb
Fentanyl	A short-acting morphine like narcotic analgesic of high poitency, often used in conjunction with other drugs. Fentanyl can enhance the effect of certain narcotics (including morphine)
Fenugreek	Trigonella foenum-graecum. Member of the family Fabaceae, may be referred to as trigonella or as Greek hay seed. Has been administered internally for stomach problems, due to its soothing properties. The seed tastes similar to maple sugar and is sometimes used as a spice and flavoring agent, often in imitation maple syrup. Can also be taken for bronchitis or fevers and gargled for sore throat. Make a poultice of pulverized seeds for fistulas, furuncles, gouty pains, neuralgia, sciatica, sores, swollen glands, wounds, tumors, and skin irritations. May be a good agent for reducing serum cholesterol
Fermentation	Process by which bacteria break down substances, yielding alcohols, gases and acids. In the colon, bacteria break down undigested bits of food, releasing carbon dioxide and hydrogen
Ferric	Pertaining to a compound of iron in which the metal is trivalent
Ferritin	A crystalline iron containing protein that functions in the storage of iron and is found especially in the liver and spleen. Iron is stored in the liver in the form of Ferritin. Increased levels of Ferritin means there is a high iron storage. This could result from an increased iron intake in the diet (vitamin supplements, food cooked in iron pots, etc.). An elevation can also occur from a destruction of liver cells causing leakage of Ferritin
Ferrous	Pertaining to a compound of iron in which the metal is divalent
Fetoproteins	Fetal proteins found in small amounts in adults in various forms. Serum alpha-fetoprotein is used as a marker for HCC
Fetor Hepaticus	A characteristically disagreeable odor to the breath that is a sign of liver failure
Fever	Abnormally high body temperature. A rise in body temperature above normal usually as a natural response to infection. Typically an oral temperature greater than 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit constitutes a fever
Feverfew	Tanacetum Parthenium. Also known as Bachelor's Button. Ancient Greeks and Egyptians cherished feverfew as a valuable herbal remedy due to its anti-inflammatory effects. Feverfew has become tremendously popular for its ability to reduce prostaglandins and histamines, thereby reducing spasms of blood vessels . Used to alleviate headaches, joint pain, stomach aches, fever, and menstrual pains. Feverfew has also been useful in relaxing smooth muscles in the uterus, promoting menstrual flow and inhibiting platelet aggregation and excessive blood clotting. Feverfew also helps stimulate digestion and improves liver function <BR>
FF	Fat Free
FFPE	Formalin Fixed, Paraffin Embedded
Fiber	Nondigestible type of complex carbohydrate. High-fiber foods are usually low in calories. Foods high in fiber include whole fruits, dried beans, whole grain breads and cereals. Types of fiber found in foods such as oat and barley bran, some fruits like apples and oranges, and some dried beans may help reduce blood cholesterol
Fiber Optics	Technology that uses bundles of plastic fibers or glass to transmit light and/or images; used widely in flexible viewing instruments such as an endoscope to allow a physician to see an organ
Fibrillation	Uncoordinated twitching of individual muscular fibers with little or no movement of the muscle as a whole. Fine, rapid fibrillar movements the replace the normal contraction of the ventricular muscle of the heart
Fibrin	Blood clotting protein
Fibrinogen	A plasma protein that is produced in the liver and is converted into fibrin during blood clot formation
Fibrosis	Scar formation resulting from the repair of tissue damage. If it occurs extensively in the liver, it is called cirrhosis, Formation of fibrous tissue; fibroid or fibrous degeneration. Condition marked by increase of interstitial fibrous tissue, fibrous degeneration
Fibrotic	Characterized by or affected with fibrosis
Filovirus	Thread like virus family which includes such viruses as Ebola and Marburg. This is a very deadly virus
First Generation Hepatitis C Antibody Tests	These were the first tests developed (in 1990) to detect hepatitis C antibodies - our body’s response to the virus. The test searches for a limited number of ‘signs’ of the antibody, such as the way its shell or envelope is made. These tests have been superseded by newer generation tests with improved sensitivity and specificity
Fish Oils	Oils high in unsaturated fats extracted from the bodies of fish or fish parts, especially the livers. Those from the liver are usually high in vitamin A. The oils are used as dietary supplements, in soaps and detergents, as protective coatings, and as a base for other food products such as vegetable shortenings
Fissula	Small cleft
Fissure	Any of several clefts separating the lobes of the liver. A break or slit in tissue usu. at the junction of skin and mucous membrane. Groove, deep crack
Fistula	Abnormal passage, passage or tunnel formed in the body by injury, disease, congenital abnormalities, or, occasionally, surgery. An abnormal, tube-like passage from a hollow organ to the surface, or from one organ to another <BR>
FJP	Familial Juvenile Polyposis
FL	Fatty Liver, Full Liquid (diet)
Flaccid	Weak, lax or soft
Flatulence	Excessive gas in the digestive tract
Flatus	Gas generated in the stomach or intestines
Flavivirus	Group of related viruses. This virus includes Hepatitis C, Yellow Fever, Denge and St. Louis Encephalitis
Flavonoid	Any of a group of plant pigments found in many foods that are thought to help protect the body from cancer
Flaxseed	Used effectively for treating colon problems, female disorders, tumors and inflammation. Flaxseed oil promotes bones, strong nails, healthy skin and teeth.
FLC	Fatty Liver Cell
Flexeril	Potent muscle relaxant
Flexure	Bent portion of a structure or organ
FLKS	Fatty Liver and Kidney Syndrome
Floating Liver	Wandering liver
Flocculent	Having downy or flaky shreds
Flu-Like Symptoms	Symptoms that are generally associated with the flu (influenza). Symptoms generally are: Fever, muscle ache, nausea & joint pain
Fluke	A flattened digenetic trematode worm
Fluoroscope	X-ray machine that makes it possible to see internal organs in motion
FNA	Fine Needle Aspiration
FNAB	Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy
FNB	Fine Needle Biopsy
FNTHC	Fine Needle Transhepatic Cholangiography
Fo-Ti	Polygonum Multiflorum--A tonic to increase energy, purify the blood and tone the kidneys and liver . Also used as a remedy for insomnia, stomach upset, and diabetes. Used effectively for coronary disease, coronary disease, excessive sweating, elevated serum cholesterol, insomnia, neurasthenia, pain, backache, tuberculous adenopathy and weakness. Fo-Ti has anti-swelling, anti-toxic, and tranquilizing properties <BR>
Foamy Liver	A liver seen post mortem, marked by the presence of numerous gas bubbles
FOBT	Fecal Occult Blood Test
Focal Liver Disease	Abscess, neoplastic infiltration, partial bile duct obstruction
Foley	A foley (indwelling) catheter. This is a thin flexible tube inserted into the urethra in order to drain the bladder
Folic Acid	A B-complex vitamin that functions along with vitamin B-12 and vitamin C in the utilization of proteins. Essential role in the formation of heme (the iron containing protein in hemoglobin necessary for the formation of red blood cells). Folic acid is essential during pregnancy to prevent neural tubular defects in the developing fetus. Necessary for DNA & RNA synthesis which is necessary for the proper growth and reproduction of all body cells. Aids in amino acid metabolism. A deficieny of Folic Acid may result in anemia, gastrointestinal disorders, Vitamin B-12 deficiency, and/or premature gray hair
Follow-Up	Checking the results periodically after treatment has been prescribed
Fomentation	Application of heat and moisture to the body to ease pain or reduce inflammation
Force of infection	The per capita rate at which susceptibles are infected
Forensic Pathology	A forensic pathologist is expert in investigating and evaluating cases of sudden, unexpected, suspicious, and violent dealth as well as other specific classes of death defined by law. The forensic pathologist serves the public as coroner or medical examiner or by performing medicolegal autopsies for such officials
Forskolin	Coleus Forskohili--Potent bronchodilator, used to treat imbalances resulting in asthma and other lung disorders. Has been shown to relieve internal eye pressure. Effects of Forskolin last for only a short period, it may lead to possible cardiovascular complications. Should be used under the supervision of a competent healthcare professional trained in its use
Fossa	An anatomical pit, groove, or depression. i.e., the fossa in the liver for the gallbladder
FP	Food Poisoning
Free Radical	Atom or molecule produced as a by-product of oxidation (the cellular process of burning fuel) that bears an unpaired electron and is potentially harmful to the body. Free radicals are neutralized in the body by antioxidants. In the body, free radicals are generated by both enzymatic and chemical reactions, including the metabolism of fats. Free radicals are believed to be involved in extensive damage to the body, including aging cancer, heart disease and arthritis
Friable	Breaks apart or crumbles easily
Fringetree Bark	Considered a specific for the treatment of gallbladder inflammation, and is valuable in treating gallstones. It will aid the liver in general, often used as part of a wider treatment for the whole body. Through its action of releasing bile, Fringetree Bark acts as a gentle and effective laxative. Used in the treatment of Duodenal catarrh, catarrhal jaundice, gall stones and hepatic torpor, alimentary glycosuria, Pancreatic disease, glandular disorders, chronic disease of liver and spleen. May be safely used in all liver problems, especially when they have developed into jaundice
from x	rays or other sources
Frosted Liver	Perihepatitis chronica hyperplastica
Frozen Section-Biopsy	Urgent histological examination of a biopsy undertaken during surgery, for determining the diagnosis and consequently the appropriate surgical procedure
ft	Foot, feet (measure)
FTI	This is a convenient parameter with mathematically accounts for the reciprocal effects of T4 and T3 uptake to give a single figure which correlates with free T4. Therefore, increased FTI is seen in hyperthyroidism, and with decreased FTI is seen in hypothyroidism. Early cases of hyperthyroidism may be expressed only by increased thyroid stimulation hormone (TSH) with normal FTI. Early cases of hypothyroidism may be expressed only by increased TSH with normal FTI.
FTLE	Full Thickness Local Excision
Fulminant	Rapid, intense and severe
Functional Disorder	Disorder in which there are no visible signs of disease, yet sometimes the intestinal tract does not seem to function properly. This kind of disorder can cause discomfort but is not life threatening and does not lead to serious disease
Functional Food	Foods that offer proven health benefits and medicinal properties and contain phytochemicals in their unadulterated states
Fungus	Any of a group of parasitic lower organisms, including molds and yeasts, that can infect tissues in the human body
FUO	Fever of Unknown Origin
Fusion Protein	The protein(s) on the surface of a virus particle responsible for fusion of the virus envelope with cellular membranes
G	Gastrin, Glycogen
G(-)	Gram Negative
G+	Gram Positive
G6PD	Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase
G6PD Deficiency	Hereditary deficiency of Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Seen in people of Mediterranean decent. Associated with destruction of red blood cells
GA	Gastric Antrum
GAG	Glycosaminoglycan
Gall	Liver Bile
Gallbladder	Small pear shaped muscular sac located under the right lobe of the liver, bile secreted by the liver is stored here, it can store about one-half pint of bile. The bile passes through the bile ducts to the duodenum (the first part of the small intestine) after food is eaten <BR>
Gallstone	Solid masses that form in the gallbladder or bile ducts. Stones are composed largely of scholesterol and bilirubin in varied proportions
Gallstone Disease --Gallbladder Disease|Gallbladder Disease|Gallstone Disease	Condition of having gallstones in the gallbladder or lodged in one of the ducts leading to or from the gallbladder
GALT	Gut Associated Lymphatic Tissue, Gut Associated Lymphoid Tissue
Gamma Glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGT)|Gamma Glutamyl Transpeptidase	An enzyme contained in the liver that plays a role in metabolism. Elevated above normal in hepatitis
Ganglioside	Any of a group of glycolipids that are found esp. in the plasma membrane of cells of the gray matter and have sialic acid, hexoses, and hexosamines in the carbohydrate part and ceramide as the lipid
Gangrene	Death of tissue, Irreversible tissue damage from pathological interruption of the blood-supply <BR>
Garden Thyme	Also known as Creeping thyme, Mountain thyme, and Wild thyme. As a tincture, extract, or infusion, thyme is commonly used in throat and bronchial problems, including acute bronchitis, laryngitis, whooping cough, diarrhea, chronic gastritis, and lack of appetite. Excessive internal use of Garden thyme can lead to symptoms of poisoning and to over stimulation of the thyroid gland
Garlic	Helps protect against heart disease and cancer, and possesses antibiotic effects. Garlic juice and its constituents can slow, or kill, more than sixty fungi and twenty types of bacteria
Garsinia --Citrin|Citrin|Garsinia	Weight loss-inducing properties, slows down the enzyme process that is responsible for producing fat within the body's cells. Also used in the treatment of edema, intestinal parasites, constipation and delayed menstruation
GAS	Gastroenterology
Gastrectomy	Partial--Surgical procedure in which a portion of the stomach is removed
Gastric	Located in the stomach, such as gastric ulcer
Gastric Juice	Colorless, watery acidic digestive fluid secreted by the stomach glands containing hydrochloric acid, mucin, pepsin and rennin
Gastric Lavage	Irrigation of the stomach when poisoning or bleeding is suspected, or to remove ingested toxins before they enter the blood stream
Gastric Mucosa	Inner lining of the stomach
Gastric Resection	Surgical procedure in which part or all of the stomach is removed
Gastric Ulcer	Open sore on the lining of the stomach
Gastrin	Secretion of the gastric mucosa that stimulates production of gastric juice
Gastritis	Upset stomach, Acute or Chronic inflammation of the stomach
Gastro	Gastroenterologist, Belly, Stomach
Gastrocolic Reflex	Mass movement of the contents of the colon that causes the urge to have a bowel movement 30 to 60 minutes after eating. The strength of the reflex is directly related to the number of calories in a meal, particularly the amount of fat in a meal
Gastroduodenal	Stomach, gut related
Gastroenteritis	Gastric flu, inflammation of the lining of both the stomach and the intestine
Gastroenteritis Virus, Murine|Murine Gastroenteritis Virus	species of the Coronavirus genus causing hepatitis in mice. 4 strains have been identified as MHV 1, MHV 2, MHV 3, and MHV 4 (also known as JHM, which is neurotropic and causes disseminated encephalomyelitis with demyelination as well as focal liver necrosis)
Gastroenterologist	Dr. who specializes in the gastrointestinal tract
Gastroenterology	Subspecialty of the digestive organs involves the liver, stomach, bowels, and gallbladder. A gastroenterologist treats conditions such as abdominal pain, ulcers, diarrhea, cancer, and jaundice. Gastroenterologists perform complex diagnostic and therapeutic procedures using lighted scopes to see internal organs. They consult with surgeons when abdominal operations are indicated. The American Board of Internal Medicine awards a Certificate of Special Qualifications for Gastroenterology
Gastroesophageal	Stomach, gullet related
Gastrointestinal Series	Gastrointestinal series, or GI series, is an investigation of the gastrointestinal tract in which a series of X-ray photographs are taken. This is made possible when the patient swallows a tasteless solution of barium. X rays are taken as the radiopaque barium passes through the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. The barium solution shows the outline of these hollow organs. The barium is usually given to the patient early in the morning when the stomach is empty. A lower GI series, or barium enema, is used to visualize the large intestine, or colon. In this case, however, the barium solution is given as an enema, rather than being swallowed.
Gastrointestinal Tract	Stomach and intestines
Gastrointestinal Transit	Passage of food through the gastrointestinal tract as measured in minutes or hours. The rate of passage through the intestine is an indicator of small bowel function
Gastroscopy	Gastroscopy is the examination of the internal surface of the stomach through a special instrument (gastroscope) that is passed through the mouth and down the esophagus. The gastroscope may be either a straight tube or flexible fiberscope. Gastroscopy is a type of endoscopy.Visual inspection of the stomach through a long, flexible tube with a light on the end that is swallowed by the patient
Gastrostomy	Surgically created opening into the stomach through the abdominal wall
GAT	Genome Amplification Test
GB	Gallbladder
GBD	Gallbladder Disease
GBS	Gastric Bypass Surgery
GD	Gastroduodenal
GE	Gastroenterostomy, Gastric Emptying, Gastrenteritis, Gastroenterology
Gene	Functional hereditary unit that occupies a fixed location on a chromosone, it has a specific influence on phenotype, and is capable of mutation to various allelic forms
Gene Expression	An important stage of viral replication at which virus genetic information is expressed: one of the major control points in replication
General	Common to a class. Distributed through many parts, diffuse
Generic Drug	Medication sold without an indicated brand name and not protected by trademark
Genetic	Pertaining to reference of origin. Produced by genes
Genetic Engineering	Intentional production of new genes and alteration of genomes by the substitution or addition of new genetic material
Genetic Material	Consisting of either RNA (a few viruses) or DNA (all other organisms), genetic material stores the fundamental information necessary to life. Information that controls reproduction, development, behavior, etc
Genome	Complete set of chromosomes
Genome Replication	The stage of viral replication at which the virus genome is copied to form new progeny genomes
Genotype	Different genotypes of the one virus are similar enough to be regarded as the same type but have some minor differences in their RNA composition. These differences may mean the virus reacts differently to our immune response or to drug treatments and natural therapies. All or part of the genetic constitution of an individual or group.
Gentain	promotes the production of bile ,gastric juices, and saliva, in the body. Used for the treatment of dyspepsia, sluggish digestion, and loss of appetite
GEP	Gastroenteropancreatic
GER	Gastroesophageal Reflux
GERD	Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Germicide	Substance that destroys germs
GET	Gastric Emptying Time
GET 1/2	Gastric Emptying Half Time
GF	Gastric Fluid, Gluten Free
GFR	Glomerular Fltration Rate
GGT|Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase	Gamma-Glutamyl Transpeptidase or Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase--levels of GGT are elevated in hepatobiliary and pancreatic diseases that obstruct the common duct but are normal in pregnancy and bone disease. Because it is not physiologically elevated in pregnancy or childhood, GGT has a role in detecting hepatobiliary disease. Drugs and alcohol ingestion, which induce microsomal enzymes, also elevate GGT; alone, it is a poor marker for alcoholic liver disease. Combined with transaminases, the detection of alcohol abuse becomes more secure. An enzyme contained in the liver that plays a role in metabolism. Elevated above normal in hepatitis
GGTP (GAMMA-GT)|GAMMA-GT|GGTP	Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase is markedly increased in lesions which cause intrahepatic or extrahepatic obstruction of bile ducts, including parenchymatous liver diseases with a major cholestatic component (e.g., cholestatic hepatitis). Lesser elevations of gamma-GT are seen in other liver diseases, and in infectious mononucleosis, hyperthyroidism, myotonic dystrophy, and after renal allograft. Drugs causing hepatocellular damage and cholestasis may also cause gamma-GT elevation. Gamma-GT is a very sensitive test for liver damage, and unexpected, unexplained mild elevations are common. Alcohol consumption is a common culprit. Decreased gamma-GT is not clinically significant <BR>
GI	Gastrointestinal
GI Cocktail	A commonly used mixture of liquid donnatal (which stops gastrointestinal spasms), viscous lidocaine and mylanta (which counteracts the stomach acid and soothes the stomach). This concoction is often given to patients presenting with severe heartburn, signs of an ulcer, or indications of an excess production of stomach acid
GI Series	Gastrointestinal Series
GIA	Gastrointestinal Assistant
Gilbert's Disease	A metabolic disorder prob. inherited as an autosomal dominant with variable penetrance and characterized by elevated levels of mostly unconjugated serum bilirubin caused esp. by defective uptake of bilirubin by the liver
Ginger	Zingiber Officinale. The aroma of ginger is due to a volatile oil which it contains in amounts of about one to three percent. Ordinarily taken in the form of capsules, ginger may also be made into a tea or a candy. Promotes cleansing of the body through perspiration, to calm nausea, and to stimulate the appetite, upset stomach, indigestion, cramps, and to dispel chills. Powdered Ginger helps with motion sickness. If suffering from gallstones, or if pregnant or nursing, consult your health care professional before taking. Daily consumption of Ginger may interfere with the absorption of dietary iron and fat-soluble vitamins, digitalis, digoxin, isoniazid, lincomycin, nalidixic acid, oral anticholinergics, phenothiazines, pheytoin, sulfonamides, tetracycline derivatives, warfarin, and phenothiozines or other psychoactive agents which are poorly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract. Ginger may mask the toxicity caused by aminoglycoside antibiotics such as neomycin. May inhibit urinary excretion of alkaline drugs, such as quinidine and amphetamines
Gingival Hypertrophy	Enlargement of the gums. It is a common side effect of cyclosporine therapy, can be managed with good oral hygiene
Ginkgo Biloba	Ginkgo Biloba. A tall, hardy, deciduous tree, has been used in Chinese medicine for 5000 years to address the health of the brain and respiratory tract. Studies have confirmed many of ginkgo's ancient traditional uses. Modern clinical use focuses on ginkgo biloba's positive effect on circulation and as an antioxidant. Used as a treatment for hardening of the arteries, senility, and as a treatment for oxygen deprivation. Powerful antioxidant that prevents platelet aggregation inside arterial walls, keeping them flexible and decreasing the formation of arteriosclerositic plaque.Considered safe and free of side effects, though taking very large doses may lead to diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, which can be controlled by lowering the dosage taken
Ginseng--American|American Ginseng|Ginseng	Increases stamina, learning ability, used for stress, fatigue caused by insomnia, poor appetite, nervousness and restlessness. Has been found to protect the body nervous system from stress, increase physical mental efficiency, stimulate increase metabolic function, lower blood pressure glucose levels when they are high, and raise them when low, increase iron metabolism, increase gastrointestinal movement tone, and cause changes in nucleic acid (RNA) biosynthesis
Ginseng--Korean|Ginseng|Korean Ginseng	Used for treatments ranging from arthritis, impotence, lethargy, senility, menopausal complaints, and loss of sexual interest. Has been used to combat fatigue, stimulate appetite, and aid in digestion
Ginseng--Siberian|Ginseng|Siberian Ginseng	Used to restore memory, concentration and cognitive abilities which may be impaired by improper blood supply to the brain. Siberian Ginseng helps the body handle stressful conditions while enhancing mental and athletic abilities
GIP	Gastric Inhibitory Polypeptide
GIS	Gas In Stomach, Gastrointestinal System
GIT	Gastrointestinal Tract
GITSG	Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group
GJ	Gastrojejunostomy
GK	Galactokinase
Gland	Organ that produces a hormone or other secretion
Glands	Any organ or tissue which selectively removes materials from the blood, concentrates or alters them, and secretes them for further use in the body (or for elimination)
Gleet	Chronic inflammation characterized by an abnormal mucus discharge from the orifice or wound
Glisson's Capsule	An investment of loose connective tissue entering the liver with the portal vessels and sheathing the larger vessels in their course through the organ
Globoside	A complex glycolipid that occurs in the red blood cells, serum, liver, and spleen of humans and accumulates in tissues in one of the variants of Tay-Sachs disease <BR>
Glomerulonephritis	Inflammation of the kidney accompanied by inflammation of the capillary loops in the glomeruli of the kidney
Glossitis	Inflammation of the tongue
Glossodynia	Pain in the tongue
Glucagon	Protein hormone secreted by alpha cells of the pancreas which plays a role in carbohydrate metabolism. A protein hormone that is produced esp. by the pancreatic islets of Langerhans and that promotes an increase in the sugar content of the blood by increasing the rate of breakdown of glycogen in the liver. A protein hormone that is produced from the pancreas in response to low blood sugar levels
Glucocorticoid	Any of a group of corticosteroids (as hydrocortisone or dexamethasone) that are involved especially in carbohydrate, protein, and fat metabolism, that tend to increase liver glycogen and blood sugar by increasing gluconeogenesis, that are anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive, and that are used widely in medicine, as in the alleviation of the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis <BR>
Glucokinase	Hexokinase found especially in the liver that catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose
Glucosamine Sulfates	Spurs the chondrocytes (cartilage cell) to produce more collagen and proteoglycans as it normalizes cartilage metabolism, which helps to keep the cartilage from breaking down. Because glucosamine &quotjump-starts" the production of these key elements of the cartilage matrix, and then protects them, it actually helps the body to repair damaged or eroded cartilage <BR>
Glucose	--A sugar known as dextrose. Widely used in the human body (and brain) for energy. Hyperglycemia can be diagnosed only in relation to time elapsed after meals and after ruling out spurious influences (especially drugs, including caffeine, corticosteroids, estrogens, indomethacin, oral contraceptives, lithium, phenytoin, furosemide, thiazides, thyroxine, and many more). Generally, fasting blood glucose &gt140 mg/dL and/or 2h postprandial glucose &gt200 mg/dL demonstrated on several occasions is suggestive of diabetes mellitus; OGTT is usually not required for diagnosis. In adults, hypoglycemia can be observed in certain neoplasms (islet cell tumor, adrenal and gastric carcinoma, fibrosarcoma, hepatoma), severe liver disease, poisonings (arsenic, CCl4, chloroform, cinchophen, phosphorous, alcohol, salicylates, phenformin, and antihistamines), adrenocortical insufficiency, hypothroidism, and functional disorders (postgastrectomy, gastroenterostomy, autonomic nervous system disorders). Failure to promptly separate serum from cells in a red top tube causes falsely depressed glucose levels. If delay in transporting a blood glucose to the lab is anticipated, the specimen should be collected in a <BR>fluoride-containing (gray-top) tube <BR>
Glucose-1-Phosphate	An ester that reacts in the presence of a phosphorylase with aldoses and ketoses to yield disaccharides or with itself in liver and muscle to yield glycogen and phosphoric acid
Glucose-6-Phosphate	Microsomal enzyme catalyzing the hydrolysis of glucose-6- Phosphate to glucose and inorganic phosphate; present in the kidney, liver, endomentrium and intestinal mucosa. An ester that is formed from glucose and ATP in the presence of a glucokinase and that is an essential early stage in glucose metabolism <BR>
Glucose Phosphate	A phosphate ester of glucose, such as Glucose-1-Phosphate and/or Glucose-6-Phosphate <BR>
Glucose Tolerance Factor	Compound containing chromium that aids insulin in regulating blood sugar levels
Glucose Tolerance Test	Glucose tolerance test is a procedure that a physician carries out to determine whether a patient is able to use and store glucose normally. The test is most commonly carried out to diagnose diabetes mellitus in patients with symptoms suggestive of diabetes. In some persons, however, an abnormally elevated fasting blood sugar level on two occasions may be sufficient to diagnose diabetes. The glucose tolerance test may also be used during pregnancy to test for gestational diabetes. Reactive hypoglycemia may also be diagnosed using this test
Glucuronidase	An enzyme that hydrolyzes a glucuronide; espicially one that occurs widely (as in the liver and spleen) and hydrolyzes the beta form of a glucuronide
Glutamate Dehydrogenase	An enzyme present especially in liver mitochondria and cytosol that catalyzes the oxidation of glutamate to ammonia and a-ketoglutaric acid <BR>
Glutamic Acid	Involved in the synthesis of DNA, glutathione and some amino acids. Helps remove excess ammonia from the body. Interconverted by the body into glutamic acid and gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA). Considered to be nature's &quotbrain food" by improving mental capacities, speeds the healing of ulcers, gives a &quotlift" from fatigue, and helps control alcoholism, craving for sugar and schizophrenia <BR>
Glutamine	Non-essential amino acid, glutamine is considered to be a brain fuel. Has been used therapeutically for alcoholism, mild depression and to reduce the craving for sweets. Glutamine is very important in the functioning of the metabolism and muscle maintenance. Glutamine supplementation can help prevent muscle and other tissue breakdown by providing the body with nitrogen and fuel
Glutathione	Natural sulfur-bearing peptide formed from the linking of three amino acids: glutamic acid, cysteine and glycine. Acts as an antioxidant and detoxicant and is involved with the selenium-containing enzyme glutathione peroxidase. Also involved in amino acid transport across cell membranes
Glutathione Peroxidase	Family of antioxidant enzymes containing selenium which are important in the reduction of different hydroperoxides, including hydrogen peroxide which is involved in the irritation of the gastrointestinal tract and increase in perspiration
Gluten	Protein in cereal grains. Barley, Oats, Rye and Wheat, contain the gliadin subfraction of gluten that is toxic to persons with celiac sprue
Glycerol	Also called Glycerin. Sweet syrupy hygroscopic alcohol containing three hydroxy groups per molecule, usu. obtained by the saponification of fats, and used as a moistening agent, emollient, and lubricant, and as an emulsifying agent
Glycine	Natural antacid and sweetener. Involved in the syntheses of DNA, phospholipids and collagen. May act as a fast inhibitory neurotransmitter. A nonessential amino acid. It is found primarily in gelatin and silk fibroin and used therapeutically as a nutrient. Sweet crystalline amino acid obtained especially by hydrolysis of proteins and used especially as an antacid. Helps trigger the release of oxygen to the energy requiring cell making process, important in the body's manufacture of hormones responsible for a strong immune system
Glycogen	Form in which carbohydrate is stored in the body, especially in the liver and muscles, broken down as needed to glucose molecules
Glycogen Storage Disease Type I	Autosomal recessive disease in which gene expression of glucose-6-phosphatase is absent, resulting in hypoglycemia due to lack of glucose production. Accumulation of glycogen in liver and kidney leads to organomegaly, particularly massive hepatomegaly. Increased concentrations of lactic acid and hyperlipidemia appear in the plasma. Clinical gout often appears in early childhood <BR>
Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI	Hepatic glycogen storage disease in which there is an apparent deficiency of hepatic phosphorylase activity
Glycogenic	Of, relating to, or involving glycogen or glycogenesis, such as the glycogenic function of the liver
Glycoside	Carbohydrate
Glycosuria	Sugar in the urine
Glycyrrhiza Glabra	Licorice root
gm	Gram
GN	Gram Negative
Goiter	Enlargement of the thyroid gland, causing a swelling in the front part of the neck
Golden Rod	As an anti-inflammatory urinary antiseptic, may be used in cystitis, and urethritis. Also used to promote the healing of wounds. <BR>Exhibits anti-catarrhal, anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, astringent, diaphoretic, carminative, and diuretic properties. For upper respiratory catarrh, use Golden Rod with Elder, Eyebright, Echinacea and Wild Indigo <BR>
Goldenseal	Hydrastis Canadensis. Used for local inflammation and debility. The root contains a group of alkaloids, hydrastine, berberine and palmatine, which are strong astringent and antiseptic agents. Hydrastine has also been shown to stimulate peristalsis and improve digestion. Used as a wash for skin diseases and sore eyes, has been recommended for a variety of inflamed mucous membranes, including stomach, intestinal, vaginal and rectal. It is reported that the plant relieves pains and helps heal wounds and stop bleeding. The antibacterial action helps reduce or prevent infection of open sores. High doses of Goldenseal may cause nausea, vomiting, a decrease in the white blood count and feelings of pins and needles in the hands and feet
Gotu Kola	Centella Asiatica. Also known as Hydrocotyle or Indian Pennywort, The crushed leaves are commonly consumed in the form of a salad or tea. Member of the family Apiaceae. Used as an energy tonic, aphrodisiac, and for treatment of high blood pressure and mental disorders, also used to lower fevers, relieve congestion due to colds and upper respiratory infections, treat phlebitis, leg cramps, swelling (edema) and heaviness or tingling in the legs, relieves high blood pressure, mental fatigue, senility, and helps the body defend itself against various toxins. Works as a blood purifier, strengths the heart. Also used on open wounds, sores, ulcers, other infections and radiation ulcers, varicose veins, cellulite. Gotu Kola contains Vitamins A, G, K, high in Magnesium
Gout	Hereditary form of arthritis caused by an excess of uric acid in the blood and by recurrent attacks of acute arthritis
GP	Gram Positive, General Practioner
GPC	Gastric Parietal Cell
Graft	A portion of tissue, or an entire organ (i.e. Liver, Pancreas, Kidney, Heart, Skin) used to replace a defect in the body. Any tissue or organ for implantation or transplantation
Graft Survival	when a transplanted tissue or organ is accepted by the body and functions properly. The potential for graft survival is increased when the recipient and donor are closely matched, and when immunosuppressive therapy is used
Graft-versus-Host Disease	A bodily condition that results when T cells from a usu. allogeneic tissue or organ transplant and especially a bone marrow transplant react immunologically against the recipient's antigens attacking cells and tissues, that affects especially the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and liver with symptoms including abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea, fever, liver dysfunction, and skin rash, and that may be fatal
Gram	Unit of weight. There are about 28 g in 1 ounce. Dietary fat, carbohydrates and protein, are measured in grams
Gram Negative	Bacteria which fail to take up Gram stains during histological preparation for identification: typically bacteria present in the bowel rather than the throat and respiratory tissues
Gram's Stain	A stain test that identifies various forms of bacterial microorganisms
Granulation	Grainy growth made up of new tissue, which usually appears on raw or irritated skin surfaces. Part of the healing process
Granulocytes	Granulocytes include neutrophils (bands and segs), eosinophils, and basophils. In evaluating numerical aberrations of these cells (and of any other leukocytes), one should first determine the absolute count by multiplying the per cent value by the total WBC count. For instance, 2% basophils in a WBC of 6,000/uL gives 120 basophils, which is normal. However, 2% basophils in a WBC of 75,000/uL gives 1500 basophils/uL, which is grossly abnormal and establishes the diagnosis of chronic myelogenous leukemia over that of leukemoid reaction with fairly good accuracy. Neutrophilia is seen in any acute insult to the body, whether infectious or not. Marked neutrophilia (&gt25,000/uL) brings up the problem of hematologic malignancy (leukemia, myelofibrosis) versus reactive leukocytosis, including &quotleukemoid reactions." Laboratory work-up of this problem may include expert review of the peripheral smear, leukocyte alkaline phosphatase, and cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood or marrow granulocytes. Without cytogenetic analysis, bone marrrow aspiration and biopsy is of limited value and will not by itself establish the diagnosis of chronic myelocytic leukemia versus leukemoid reaction. Smokers tend to have higher granulocyte counts than nonsmokers. The usual increment in total wbc count is 1000/5L for each pack per day smoked. Repeated excess of &quotbands" in a differential count of a healthy patient should alert the physician to the possibility of Pelger-Huet anomaly, the diagnosis of which can be established by expert review of the peripheral smear. Neutropenia may be paradoxically seen in certain infections, including typhoid fever, brucellosis, viral illnesses, rickettsioses, and malaria. Other causes include aplastic anemia (see list of drugs above), aleukemic acute leukemias, thyroid disorders, hypopitituitarism, cirrhosis, and Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Eosinophilia is seen in allergic disorders and invasive parasitoses. Other causes include pemphigus, dermatitis herpetiformis, scarlet fever, acute rheumatic fever, various myeloproliferative neoplasms, irradiation, polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, smoking, tuberculosis, coccidioidomycosis, idiopathicallly as an inherited trait, and in the resolution phase of many acute infections. Eosinopenia is seen in the early phase of acute insults, such as shock, major pyogenic infections, trauma, surgery, etc. Drugs producing eosinopenia include corticosteroids, epinephrine, methysergide, niacin, niacinamide, and procainamide. Basophilia, if absolute (see above) and of marked degree is a great clue to the presence of myeloproliferative disease as opposed to leukemoid reaction. Other causes of basophilia include allergic reactions, chickenpox, ulcerative colitis, myxedema, chronic hemolytic anemias, Hodgkin's disease, and status post-splenectomy. Estrogens, antithyroid drugs, and desipramine may also increase basophils. Basopenia is not generally a clinical problem <BR>
Granulocytopenia	Lack of white blood cells
Granuloma|Foreign-Body	Persistent swelling consisting of tightly packed white blood cells surrounding and isolating material not natural to the body
Granulomatous	Abscess, neoplastic infiltration, partial bile duct obstruction
Granulomatous Hepatitis	A multifactorial infiltrative liver disorder with or without additional hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. The term &quotgranulomatous hepatitis" is often used, but the condition is not a true hepatitis. Hepatic granulomas are found in about 3 to 10% of liver biopsies. There may be insignificant incidental findings, but more often they reflect clinically relevant disease --usually a systemic disorder rather than primary liver disease <BR>
Grape Seed Extract	Helps Vitamin C enter the body's cells, thus strengthening the cell membranes, and protecting the cells from oxidative damage. Helps increase the effectiveness of vitamin C by acting as a carrier and as a restorer of oxidized vitamin C by working with glutathione. Provides protection to brain and spinal nerves from potent free radical damage. Binds to collagen fibers, increasing elasticity and flexibility in muscles, tendons, and ligaments. Extremely stable on the shelf, showing no loss of potency after 12 years of storage. Has 50 times greater antioxidant capability than vitamin E and 20 times greater activity than vitamin C (in vitro). Powerful, natural and hypoallergenic free radical scavenger and antioxidant. Inhibits the enzymes which lead to histamine formation. Highly bioavailable bioflavonoid complex which is rapidly absorbed and distributed throughout the body within minutes
Grapefruit Seed	Well known as an anti-fungal agent in that their consumption kills many different types of parasites and assists the body in producing beneficial bacteria. A natural ingredient found in the seeds kills candida, e.coli, influenza, herpes, salmonella, staph, strep, parasites, fungi and traveler's diarrhea, used as an antibiotic, antifungal, antiviral, antiprotozoan, antiseptic and disinfectant
Gravel Root	Used primarily for kidney stones or gravel. Gravel Root has been used for the following conditions: chronic endometriosis, chronic uterine disease, dropsy, dysmenorrhoea, dysuria, gravel, hematuria, leucorrhoea, strangury, disease of the kidney and bladder from an excess of uric acid, threatened abortion, ovarian and uterine atony, constant desire to urinate, intermittent fever, and severe bone pains
Gravol	An antihistamine medication which reduces nausea and vomiting caused by narcotics, and which enhances their painkilling effect and causes sedation
Green Tea	Camellia Sinensis. Green tea originates in China, Japan and other parts of Asia. The leaf of the plant is used in creating the extract which is potent and bioflavonoid-rich. Used primarily for its free-radical scavenging capabilities. The key ingredient EGCG, which stands for Epigallocatechin Gallate, protects against digestive and respiratory infections. Historical uses of the tea are reducing high blood pressure, inhibiting pathogenic bacteria that cause food poisoning and blocking the actions of carcinogens, ultraviolet light and metastasis. Blocks the attachment of bacteria to the teeth, protecting against cavities. Green tea extract is non-toxic, both in acute doses and high long-term doses <BR>
Grindelia	Used in asthma, bronchitis, whooping cough and upper respiratory catarrh. Because of the relaxing effect on the heart and pulse rate, there may be a reduction in blood pressure. Exhibits anti-spasmodic, expectorant, and hypotensive properties. Grindelia acts to relax smooth muscles and heart muscles. This explains its use in the treatment of asthmatic and bronchial conditions, particularly when associated with a rapid heart beat and nervous response. Lotions containing Grindelia can be used in the dermatitis caused by poison ivy
Griping	Causing a clutching, painful, or grasping feeling in the bowels
GRP	Gastrin Releasing Peptide
GS	Gallstone, Gardner Syndrome
GSE	Gluten Sensitive Enteropathy
GU	Gastric Ulcer. Genitourinary
Guaiac	Resin from the wood of Guajacum officinale and G. sanctum trees, used as a reagent in tests for occult blood and formerly in the treatment of rheumatism
Guaiac Test--Occult Blood Test|Guaiac Test|Occult Blood Test	Diagnostic test in which a tiny amount of the material to be tested (usually feces) is rubbed on a slide. A chemical reaction is performed to assess the presence or absence of blood, which may not be visible on direct inspection of the specimen
Guanine	Crystalline purine base, one of the four basic nucleotides that comprise DNA
Guar Gum	A digestive fiber used throughout the food industry as a thickening agent. It helps regulate the rate of absorption of nutrients, including sugar, spreading it over a longer period of time. The result is a slower rise in blood sugar levels, and a less rapid subsequent drop
Guarana	Paullinia Cupana--Used as a general tonic for the body and as a source of energy. Guarana acts on the central nervous system to prevent fatigue and break down lactic acid from muscle stress. A high energy source that increases mental alertness, slows the pulse, decreases the appetite, fights fatigue, an excellent mood elevator. Also used as a nervine tonic for hangovers, neuralgia and menstrual headaches, leucorrhea, diarrhea, and fevers; it's chief use in Europe and North America is for headaches, especially if of a rheumatic or nervous nature
Guiac	A test of stool with a gloved finger inserted looking for blood
Gum Karaya	A soluble fiber which aids in the intestinal processes of the digestive system
GV	Gastric Volume
GVH	Graft versus Host
Gynecomastia	Development of breasts in men
h	Hour
H and V	Hemigastrectomy and Vagotomy
H&E	Hematoxlin and Eosin (Stain)
H&P	History & Physical
HA	Hepatic Artery, Hepatitis A, Hyperalimentation
HAA	Hepatitis Associated Antigen
HAAA	Hepatitis-associated aplastic anemia
Haemagglutination-Inhibition	An assay used for certain types of viruses which are able to agglutinate red blood cells. Haemagglutination-inhibition records blocking of this process by antibodies, and thus, the presence of antibodies against the virus <BR>
HAP	High Amplitude Peristalsis
Harris' Band	Anomalous peritoneal folds which extend from the gallbladder to the inferior surface of the liver to the proximal duodenum, sometimes traversing the mesocolon near the hepatic flexure
HAV	Hepatitis A Virus
Hawthorne Berry	Crataegus Laevigata. Also known as Mayblossom and Whitehorn. Apparently causes a direct dilation of the smooth muscles of the coronary vessels which lowers their resistance and increasing blood flow. Said to have a direct, favorable effect on the heart as well as increase nerve conductivity. Used as a mild astringent for treating sore throats, as well as treating hypertension, nervous disorders and insomnia
Hazardous Material	Substances that are dangerous. i.e. Things that have come into contact with the hepatitis C virus through use, such as needles, syringes, alcohol swabs, bandaids
HB-Ag	Hepatitis B Antigen
Hb	hemoglobin
HB	Hepatitis B
HBc	Hepatitis B Core (antigen)
HBcAb	Antibody to the Hepatitis B Core Antigen
HBcAg	Hepatitis v Core Antigen
HbCV	Hepatitis B Conjugate Vaccine
HBe	Hepatitis B e Surface (antigen)
HBeAb	Antibody to the Hepatitis B e Antigen
HBeAg	Hepatitis B e Antigen
HBF	Hepatic Blood Flow
HBIG	Hepatitis V Immune Globulin
HBs	Hepatitis B Surface (antigen)
HBsAg	Hepatitis B Surface Antigen. This is the outer surface of the hepatitis B virus that triggers an antibody response. HBsAg "positive" or "reactive" means that the person is infected with HBV and can possibly pass it on to others with whom they come into contact with
HBV	Hepatitis B Virus
HC	High Calorie
HCD	High Carbohydrate Diet
HCI	Hydrochloric Acid
HCO3	Bicarbonate
HCS	Hematocystic
Hct	Hematocrit
HCV	Hepatitis C Virus
HCV-RNA	(Hepatitis C Virus Ribonucleic Acid)--Fragments of the replicating hepatitis C virus. These can be detected using highly sophisticated testing to determine the level of the hepatitis C virus present in the body
HCV-RNA (qPCR)-Negative	is defined as less than 100 copies/ml of hepatitis C viral RNA as measured by the National Genetics Institute assay. Considered a Sustained Response <BR>
HDL	High Density Lipoprotein. Known as "good" cholesterol, HDL's are large, dense, protein-fat particles that circulate in the blood picking up already used and unused cholesterol and taking them back to the liver as part of a recycling process. Higher levels of HDL's are associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease because the cholesterol is cleared more readily from the blood
HDL-C	HDL-Cholesterol
HDL(1)|HDL	Lp(a) Lipoprotein
HDL(2)|HDL	High Density Lipoprotein
HDL(3)|HDL	High Density Lipoprotein
HDLP	High Density Lipoprotein
HDV	Hepatitis D Virus, Human Delta Virus
HE	Human Enteric
Heartburn	A sensation of warmth or burning behind the sternum or in the epigastrium. Sometimes there is a acidic taste associated with heartburn
Heartsease	Viola Tricolor--also known as Wild Pansy. Used in the form of an ointment and poultice in eczema and other skin troubles, and internally for bronchitis
HELLP Syndrome	Hemolysis elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count: a serious disorder of pregnancy of unknown etiology that occurs between the 23rd and 39th weeks, that is characterized by a great reduction in the number of platelets per cubic millimeter, by hemolysis, by abnormal liver function tests, and sometimes by hypertension, and that requires termination of pregnancy
Helminth	Aparasitic worm such as a ascarid, liver fluke, tapeworm, or leech
Helper Cell	A type of lymphocyte which aids the recognition of specific antigens and the production of an immune response
Helper T Cell (HTL)|Helper T Cell	Helper T Cells are activated by binding to an HTL specific epitope presented by cells in a similar fashion as CTL epitopes are presented. When activated, HTLs help expand the immune response by releasing chemicals which stimulate the CTL response and the B-cell antibody responses
Hematemesis	Vomiting of blood
Hematochezia	The passage of bright red blood from the rectum. It is often due to bleeding from the colon, rectum or hemorrhoids
Hematochezia	Maroon stools, usually from a lower GI bleed <BR>
Hematocrit	The percentage of the volume of a blood sample occupied by cells
Hematogenous	Concerned with the production of blood or of one or more of its constituents. Taking place or spread by way of the blood
Hematoma	Bruising. Accumulation of blood trapped within the tissues of the body
Hematuria	Blood in the Urine. Gross hematuria can be observed with the naked eye and indicate severe hemorrhage. Microscopic hematuria is either observed with microscope or by testing for the presence of blood with chemical strips
Hemeproteins	Proteins that contain an iron porphyrin, or heme, prosthetic group resembling that of hemoglobin
Hemlock	Conium Maculatum--POISON. Because of its peculiar sedative action on the motor centers, Hemlock juice (Succus conii) is prescribed as a remedy in cases of undue nervous motor excitability, acute mania, spasms of the larynx and gullet, teething in children, epilepsy from dentition cramp, in the early stages of paralysis agitans, etc. As an inhalation it is said to relieve cough in bronchitis, whooping cough, asthma, etc. Hemlock has to be administered with care, as narcotic poisoning may result from internal use, and overdoses produce paralysis. In poisonous doses it produces complete paralysis with loss of speech, the respiratory function is at first depressed and ultimately ceases altogether and death results from asphyxia. The mind remains unaffected to the last. In the account of the death of Socrates, reference is made to loss of sensation as one of the prominent symptoms of his poisoning, but the dominant action is on the motor system. It is placed in Table II of the Poison Schedule
Hemobilia	Bleeding into the biliary passages
Hemochromatosis	Disorder of iron metabolism characterized by excess deposition of iron in the tissues, especially the liver. It is characterized by pigmentation of the skin, hepatic cirrhosis, decreased carbohydrate tolerance, cardiomyopathy and endocrinopathy (especially hypogonadism). Mainly seen in men over the age of 40 years. It has an associated arthropathy distinguished by involvement of the metacarpophalangeal joints (particularly the second and third), wrists, knees, shoulders, and hips. There is often an associated chondrocalcinosis
Hemodialysis	A method of dialysis in which blood is purified by circulating through an apparatus outside the body. Sometimes called an "artificial kidney"
Hemoglobin	The red blood pigment which carries oxygen in the blood
Hemoglobin	The iron containing protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen <BR><BR>
Hemoglobins	Oxygen-carrying pigments of the erythrocytes, formed by the developing erythrocyte in bone marrow. Hemoglobin is a conjugated protein containing four heme groups and globin. A molecule of hemoglobin contains four globin polypeptide chains, designated alpha, beta, gamma, delta in the adult. Each is composed of several hundred amino acids
Hemolysis	Destruction of red blood cells, resultant escape of hemoglobin
Hemolytic Anemia	A group of disorder in which anemia occurs due to destruction of red cells. In hemolytic anemia, serum haptoglobin levels is decreased
Hemolytic Anemia	Anemia caused by excessive destruction of red blood cells
Hemoperfusion	Dialysis of the blood to remove foreign substances such as poisons or drugs
Hemophilia	Hereditary blood disease where the blood fails to clot and abnormal bleeding occurs. It is found only in males and is treated by injections of Factor VIII
Hemopoiesis	the body function in producing blood products. It includes: erythropoiesis: production of red blood cells and leucopoiesis: production of white blood cells
Hemopoietic	Blood cell formation
Hemoptysis	Coughing up blood
Hemorrhage	Rupture of a blood vessel or leakage of blood from a vessel. Significance of hemorrhage depends upon the volume of blood loss, rate of loss, and site of hemorrhage. Rapid losses of greater than 20% of the blood volume may induce hypovolemic shock. Hemorrhage that might be insignificant in the subcutaneous tissue can be fatal when located within the brain
Hemorrhoids	Dilation of veins in the anal area. Problems associated with hemorrhoids occur when these veins become enlarged, prolapsed, or become inflamed or plugged
Hemosiderosis	A focal or general increase in tissue iron stores without associated tissue damage
Hemostasis	Stopping the flow of bleeding, stopping or slowing circulation. The ability to control bleeding following trauma to the tissue. It is affected by vascular reaction, platelet function, adn coagulation factors
Hemostatic	Agent that arrests bleeding and hemorrhages
Hemothorax	When blood accumulates in one of the chest cavity. Blood in the pleural space of the chest
HEN	Home Enteral Nutrition
Henna	Lawsonia Alba--Widely used in Europe for tinting the hair, usually in the form of a shampoo. There has been found in Henna a brown substance of a resinoid fracture, having the chemical properties much like the tannins, and therefore named Hennotannic acid. It has been used both internally and locally in jaundice, leprosy, smallpox, and affections of the skin
HEP	Hepatic
Hepar	Liver
Heparin	A glycosaminoglycan sulfuric acid ester that occurs esp. in the liver and lungs, that prolongs the clotting time of blood by preventing the formation of fibrin, and that is administered parenterally in the form of its sodium salt in vascular surgery and in the treatment of postoperative thrombosis and embolism. In other words-A medication which quickly produces anticoagulation and which must be given by injection
Hepat, Hepato|Hepat|Hepato	Combining form meaning liver, hepatic
Hepatalgia	Pain in the Liver
Hepatatrophia	Atrophy of the liver
Hepatectomize	To deprive of the liver by surgical removal
Hepatectomy	Excision of the liver or a part of it
Hepatic	Pertaining to the liver, involving the liver
Hepatic Arteriole	Proposed but controversial supply arteriole from terminal hepatic artery into parenchymal sinusoids in the periportal region
Hepatic Artery	Branch of the celiac artery that supplies the liver with arterial blood
Hepatic Cell	Hepatocyte
Hepatic Coma	State of unconsciousness seen in patients severely ill with liver disease. Sometimes the precomatose state of hepatic encephalopathy. A coma that is induced by severe liver disease
Hepatic Duct	Common bile duct. A duct conveying the bile away from the liver and uniting with the cystic duct to form the common bile duct
Hepatic Encephalopathy	All stages in the onset and development of coma, Changes in consciousness, behavior, mental state. Occurs in advanced liver disease. A group of symptoms that may occur when there is damage to the brain and nervous system as a complication of liver disorders, characterized by various neurologic symptoms including changes in behavior changes, consciousness, and personality changes
Hepatic Flexure	Also called Right Colic Flexure, the right-angle bend in the colon on the right side of the body near the liver that marks the junction of the ascending colon and the transverse colon
Hepatic Necrosis	Destruction of functional liver tissue
Hepatic Portal System	Group of veins that carry blood from the capillaries of the stomach, spleen, intestine, and pancreas to the sinusoids of the liver
Hepatic Portal Vein	A portal vein carrying blood from the digestive organs and spleen to the liver where the nutrients carried by the blood are altered by hepatocytes before passing into the systemic circulation
Hepatic Siderosis	The deposit of an abnormal quantity of iron in the liver
Hepatic Tuberculosis	Infection of the liver with tubercle bacilli producing localized granulomata, miliary lesions, or tuberculoma
Hepatic Vein	any of a group of veins that transports blood from the liver to the inferior vena cava, which carries the blood to the right atrium of the heart. In the ascent to the heart, the inferior vena cava passes along a groove in the posterior side of the liver, it is there that the hepatic veins joins it. Blood transported by the hepatic veins comes not only from the liver but also from most of the abdominal organs. This blood flows to the liver by way of the aportal vein. Veins which drain the liver
Hepatic Vein Thrombosis	Occlusion of the hepatic veins caused by thrombi or fibrous obliteration of the veins
Hepaticoduodenostomy	Anastomosis of the hepatitic duct to the duodenum
Hepaticoenterostomy	Anastomosis of the hepatitic duct to the intestine
Hepaticogastrostomy	Anaastomosis of the hepatitic duct to the stomach
Hepaticojejunostomy	Anastomosis of the hepatic duct to the jejunum
Hepaticojejunostomy Roux-en-Y	The surgical fashioning of a direct connection between hepatic duct and jejunum to drain bile directly from the liver when disease or injury has damaged the bile ducts
Hepaticolithotomy	Incision of the hepatic duct with removal of calculi
Hepaticolithotripsy	The crushing of a calculus in the hepatitic duct
Hepaticostomy	Fistulization of the hepatitc duct
Hepaticotomy	Incision of the hepatitic duct
Hepatitc Trauma	Liver injury resulting from blunt trauma or penetrating wounds
Hepatitic Calculi	Stones originating in extrahepatic biliary tract or solely in the liver. Also found in liver cysts
Hepatitis	Inflammation of the liver, Swollen Liver, liver disease involving degenerative or necrotic alterations of hepatocytes
Hepatitis A	Self-limited viral disease of worldwide distribution caused by the hepatitis A virus, more common in areas of poor hygiene and low socioeconomic standards, transmitted almost exclusively by the fecal-oral route, although parenteral transmission is possible; no carrier state. Incubation period is approximately 30 days, with a range of 15 to 50 days. Most cases are clinically inapparent or have mild flulike symptoms; jaundice, if present, is usually mild. Massive hepatic necrosis (fulminant hepatitis) can occur but much less commonly than with hepatitis B or non-A, non-B hepatitis. Previously called epidemic hep., MS-1 hep., jaundice infectious hep., and short-incubation hepatitis <BR>
Hepatitis A Virus, Human|Hepatitis A Virus|Human Hepatitis A Virus	Species of Hepatovirus which causes human hepatitis A. The virus replicates in hepatocytes and is thought to reach the intestine via the bile duct. Transmission occurs by the fecal-oral route
Hepatitis A Virus, VP3 Protein (62-75)|Hepatitis A Virus	Synthetic peptide <BR>
Hepatitis Agents, GB|GB Hepatitis Agents	Proposed members of the family Flaviviridae. GBV-B causes hepatitis in tamarins and possibly humans, and is the putative etiological agent of a non-(A-E) hepatitis, GB hepatitis
Hepatitis--Alcoholic|Alcoholic Hepatitis	Acute or chronic degenerative and inflammatory lesion of the liver in the alcoholic which is potentially progressive or reversible; it does not necessarily include steatosis, fibrosis, or cirrhosis of alcoholics, although it is frequently associated with these conditions. Liver inflammation resulting from alcoholism, often a precursor of cirrhosis of the liver <BR>
Hepatitis Antibodies	Immunoglobulins raised by any form of viral hepatitis; some of these antibodies are used to diagnose the specific kind of hepatitis
Hepatitis Antigens	Antigens from any of the hepatitis viruses including surface, core, and other associated antigens
Hepatitis B	Viral disease caused by the hepatitis B virus that is endemic worldwide, the areas of highest endemicity being China and Southeast Asia, subSaharan Africa, most Pacific islands, and the Amazon basin. The virus is shed in all body fluids by individuals with acute or chronic infections and by asymptomatic carriers, and is transmitted primarily by parenteral routes, such as by blood transfusion or by sharing of needles among drug users; oral transmission can occur but has low efficiency, and it can be spread by intimate personal contact, especially sexual contact, and by vertical transmission from mother to neonate. Incubation period averages about 90 days, with a range of 40 to 180 days, the clinical course is more variable than in hepatitis A. During the prodromal phase there may be fever, nausea, malaise, anorexia, and vomiting, which lessens with the onset of clinical jaundice, and urticaria, angioedema, arthritis, or, rarely, glomerulonephritis or a serum sickness like syndrome may occur. Most patients recover completely and become HBS Ag-negative in 3 to 4 months, some will remain chronic carriers or develop chronic active hepatitis or chronic persistent hepatitis. Massive hepatic necrosis (fulminant hepatitis) is an infrequent complication. In areas of high endemicity a relationship has been shown between hepatitis and virus infection, cirrhosis, and primary hepatocellular carcinoma, with the latter being one of the most common neoplasms. Previously called inoculation hepatitis, long incubation hepatitis, MS2 hepatitis, serum hepatitis, and homologous serum hepatitis or jaundice
Hepatitis B Antibodies	Antibodies to the hepatitis B antigens, including antibodies to the surface (Australia) and core of the Dane particle and those to the "e" antigens
Hepatitis B Antigens	Antigens of the virion of the Hepatitis B Virus or the Dane particle, its surface, core and other associated antigens, like the HBe antigen
Hepatitis B Core Antigens	Core protein antigen of the hepatitis B virus present inside complete virions (Dane particles) and in free core particles in the nuclei of infected cells; the antigen is not present in the blood of infected individuals, but anti-HBc antibodies appear during the acute infection; they do not protect against reinfection
Hepatitis B e Antigens	Core protein antigen of hepatitis B virus present in the blood in some infected individuals. Anti-HBe antibodies appear transiently during convalescence; they do not protect against reinfection
Hepatitis B Hyperimmune Globulin	has high antibody titre aganist HBsAg; given in conjunction with vacine for passive immunization
Hepatitis B Surface Antigens	Viral antigen of the hepatitis B virus detected by radioimmunoassay. An antigen that resembles a virus and is found in the sera especially of patients with hepatitis B -- alsoc called Australia antigen; abbr. HBsAg
Hepatitis B Vaccines	Vaccines or candidate vaccines containing inactivated hepatitis B or some of its component antigens and designed to prevent hepatitis B. Some vaccines may be recombinantly produced
Hepatitis B Virus	Unclasified DNA virus having complex, double-layered virions 42 nm in diameter, double-stranded genome, and three major antigens, the hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAG), surface antigen (HBsAG), and e antigen (HBeAG). Etiologic agent of hepatitis B
Hepatitis B Virus Large Envelope Protein	Required for hepatitis B virion maturation; amino acid sequence has been determined
Hepatitis B Virus, Duck|Duck Hepatitis B Virus|Hepatitis B Virus	DNA virus that closely resembles human hepatitis B virus. It has been recovered from naturally infected ducks <BR>
Hepatitis B Virus, Woodchuck|Hepatitis B Virus|Woodchuck Hepatitis B Virus	Orthohepadnavirus causing chronic liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma in woodchucks. It closely resembles the human hepatitis B virus<BR>
Hepatitis C	Viral disease caused by the hepatitis C virus, most common form of post-transfusion hepatitis; also follows parenteral drug abuse and is a common acute sporadic hepatitis, with approximately 50% of acutely infected persons developing chronic hepatitis. Chronic infection is generally mild and asymptomatic, but cirrhosis may occur <BR> <BR>
Hepatitis C Antibodies	Antibodies to the Hepatitis C antigens including antibodies to envelope, core, and non-structural proteins
Hepatitis C Antigens	Antigens of the virions of hepatitis C-like viruses, their, core, surface or other associated antigens
Hepatitis C-Like Viruses	Genus of Flaviviridae causing parenterally transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis (Hepatitis C) which is associated with transfusions and drug abuse. Hepatitis C virus is the type species
Hepatitis C Virus Envelope 2 Protein	RN refers to quasispecies 4E; amino acid sequence known
Hepatitis C Virus Nucleocapsid Protein	Antibodies against the above protein are found in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma; amino acid sequence has been determined
Hepatitis E	Acute form of hepatitis caused by a virus serologically distinct from the agents of hepatitis A, B, and C. Hepatitis E is associated with fecally contaminated water, is enterically transmitted, commonly found in tropical or subtropical countries
Hepatitis E Virus	Positive-stranded RNA virus species in the genus Calicivirus, causing enterically-transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis (Hepatitis C)
Hepatitis Virus, Duck|Duck Hepatitis Virus	Highly fatal, rapidly spreading picornavirus disease of waterfowl ducklings, characterized primarily by hepatitis marked by an enlarged, mottled, hemorrhagic liver
Hepatitis Viruses	Any of the viruses that cause inflammation of the liver. Includes both RNA and DNA viruses as well viruses from humans and animals
Hepatitis, Chronic Active|Chronic Active Hepatitis	Chronic inflammation of the liver occurring as a sequel to hepatitis B or non-A, non-B hepatitis. The same disease may occur in congenital or acquired hypogammaglobulinemia, or in association with the administration of certain drugs. It is characterized by infiltration of portal areas by plasma cells and macrophages, piecemeal necrosis (destruction of hepatocytes in the periphery of lobules), and fibrosis. The course is highly variable; there may be long asymptomatic periods interspersed with periods of symptomatic hepatitis with malaise, jaundice, fever, and anorexia; there may be extrahepatic manifestations, including amenorrhea, arthritis, thyroiditis, skin rashes, vasculitis, glomerulonephritis ulcerative colitis, and Sjogren's syndrome; or the disease may progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. Autoimmune pathogenesis is suspected. Also called autoimmune hepatitis, chronic aggressive hepatitis, plasma cell hepatitis, lupoid hepatitis, subacute hepatitis, and acute juvenile cirrhosis <BR>
Hepatitis, Infectious Canine|Infectious Canine Hepatitis	adenovirus infection causing fever, edema, vomiting, and diarrhea in dogs, especially puppies. In foxes it causes acute encephalitis with coma, convulsions, paralysis, and death <BR>
Hepatitis, Lupoid|Lupoid Hepatitis	Chronic active hepatitis associated with Lupus Erythematosus <BR>
Hepatitis, Non A Non B	Hepatitis clinically and immunologically similar to hepatitis A and hepatitis B but caused by different viruses
Hepatitis, Peliosis|Peliosis Hepatitis	An abnormal condition characterized by the occurrence of numerous small blood-filled cystic lesions throughout the liver <BR>
Hepatitis, Toxic|Toxic Hepatitis	Hepatitis caused by true hepatotoxins and drugs which induce a hypersensitivity reaction <BR>
Hepatitis, Viral, Animal|Animal Viral Hepatitis|Viral Hepatitis	Viral hepatitis in animals <BR><BR>
Hepatitis, Viral, Human|Human Viral Hepatitis|Viral Hepatitis	Viral hepatitis in man
Hepatization	Conversion of tissue (such as the lungs in pneumonia) into a substance which resembles liver tissue
Hepatobiliary	Related to the liver and bile. Relating to, situated in or near, produced in, or affecting the liver and bile, bile ducts, and gallbladder
Hepatoblastoma	A malignant tumor of the liver especially of infants and young children that is composed of cells resembling embryonic liver cells
Hepatocarcinogen	Substance or agent causing cancer of the liver
Hepatocarcinogenesis	The production of cancer of the liver
Hepatocarcinogenic	Producing or tending to produce cancer of the liver
Hepatocarcinogenicity	The power or tendency to produce cancer of the liver
Hepatocarcinoma	Carcinoma of the liver
Hepatocele	Hernia of the liver
Hepatocellular	Or or pertaining to Liver cells
Hepatocellular Carcinoma	Cancer of the liver. A malignant tumor arising in the liver. In most cases, it occurs as a complication following cirrhosis
Hepatocellular Disease	Various forms of hepatitis, cirrhosis, infiltrative disorders
Hepatocellular Jaundice	Jaundice due to the destruction and impaired function of liver cells
Hepatocellular Necrosis	Destruction of Liver Cells
Hepatocholangiocarcinoma	Cholangiohepatoma
Hepatocholangioduodenostomy	Establishment of a communication between the hepatic duct and the duodenum
Hepatocholangiogastrostomy	Establishment of a communication between the hepatic duct and the stomach
Hepatocholangiojejunostomy	Establishment of a communication between the hepatic duct and the jejunum (a portion of the small intestine)
Hepatocholangitis	Inflammation of the liver and bile ducts
Hepatocirrhosis	Cirrhosis of the liver
Hepatocolic	Pertaining to the liver and the colon
Hepatocystic	Pertaining to the liver and the gallbladder
Hepatocyte	Also called Liver Cell and Hepatic Cell. Any of the polygonal epithelial parenchymatous cells of the liver that secrete bile
Hepatodynia	Pain in the liver
Hepatogenic	Produced or originating in the liver
Hepatogenous	Produced by or originating in the liver
Hepatogram	A graphic record of the liver pulse
Hepatography	Roentgenography of the liver
Hepatojugular	Pertaining to the liver and juglar vein
Hepatolenticular Degeneration	Autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism involving the transport and storage of copper in the body. Excessive accumulation of copper in the kidney, liver, and brain, which if untreated, is invariably fatal
Hepatolienal	Pertaining to the liver and the spleen
Hepatolienography	Roentgenographic visualization of the liver and spleen after injection of a radiopaque medium
Hepatolith	A calculus in the biliary passages of the liver
Hepatolithectomy	Removal of calculus from the liver
Hepatolithiasis	Presence of calculi in the biliary ducts of the liver
Hepatologist	A liver specialist, usually working in a liver clinic
Hepatology	The discipline of Hepatology encompasses the structure, function, and diseases of the liver and biliary tract. The American Board of Internal Medicine considers Hepatology part of the subspecialty of gastroenterology. Physicians who identify themselves as Hepatologists usually, but not always, have been trained in gastrointestinal programs
Hepatolysin	A cytolysin destructive to liver cells
Hepatolysis	Destruction of the liver cells
Hepatoma	Any tumor of the liver, a malignant tumor whose parenchymal cells resemble those in the liver
Hepatomalacia	Softening of the liver
Hepatomegaly	Enlargement of the Liver
Hepatomelanosis	Melanosis of the liver
Hepatomphalocele	Umbilical hernia with liver involvement in the hernial sac
Hepatonephric	Pertaining to the liver and kidney
Hepatopancreatic	Of or relating to the liver and the pancreas
Hepatopathy	An abnormal or diseased state of the liver
Hepatopexy	Surgical fixation of a displaced liver to the abdominal wall
Hepatopleural	Pertaining to the liver and pleura
Hepatopneumonic	Affecting, pertaining to the liver and lungs
Hepatoportal	Pertaining to the portal system of the liver
Hepatoprotection	he mechanisms of hepatoprotection are diverse, and include antioxidant activity (Kiso et al; Abdugafurova et al; Tan; Ju et al), direct antiviral effects (Hikino; Crance), enhancement of interferon production (Hikino; Shinada); enhanced antibody production (Hikino), enhancement of extrathymic T-Cell activity in the liver (Kimura et al), and protection from immunological (auto-immune) injuries (Hikino; Mizoguchi et al). A number of animal and in vitro trials have shown that glycyrrhizin can protect liver cells from damage from a variety of chemical or immunological agents (Nakamura et al; Mizoguchi et al; Shibayama; Shiki et al; Zhao et al).
Hepatoptosis	Abnormally low position of the liver in the abdomen
Hepatopulmonary	Hepatopnuemonic
Hepatorenal	Pertaining to both the kidney and the liver
Hepatorenal Syndrome	Renal failure in those with liver disease, usually liver cirrhosis or obstructive jaundice. Historically called Heyd disease, urohepatic syndrome, or bile nephrosis
Hepatorrhaphy	Suturing of the liver following an operation or injury
Hepatorrhexis	Rupture of the liver
Hepatoscan	Surface scintiscan of the liver
Hepatoscopy	Inspection of the liver by laparotomy or peritoneoscopy
Hepatosis	Non-inflammatory disorder of the liver
Hepatospleenography	Radiography of the liver and spleen
Hepatosplenic	Of or affecting the liver and spleen
Hepatosplenitis	Inflammation of the liver and spleen
Hepatosplenomegaly	Coincident enlargement of the liver and spleen
Hepatotherapy	Administration of a liver extract or liver
Hepatotomy	Incision into the liver
Hepatotoxic	Poisonous to liver cells. Relating to or causing injury to the liver
Hepatotoxicity	A state of toxic damage to the liver. A tendency or capacity to cause hepatotoxicity
Hepatovirus	Genus of Picornaviridae causing infectious hepatitis naturally in humans and experimentally in other primates. Transmitted through fecal contamination of water or food
Hepatoxin	Any substance that causes injury or death to the parenchymal liver cells. A poisonous product elaborated in the liver
Hept, Hepta|Hept|Hepta	A combining form meaning 7
Heptacellular Necrosis	Death of liver cells
Heptachlor	A persistent cyclodiene chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticide that causes liver disease in animals and is a suspected human carcinogen
Herb	Plant or part of a plant that is used for medical treatment, flavoring, or other purposes. Natural remedies derived from whole plants as well as from plant roots, leaves, seeds, stems and other parts. Herbs are still the basis for Chinese medicine and are important constituents of many European natural remedies
Herd Immunity	Specifically, the mechanism by which an infection may be eradicated from a population although some susceptibles still remain, because the remainder of the population is immune and thus transmission is reduced. More generally, the immunological status of a population of hosts and its effect on transmission rates
Hereditary	Term used to describe conditions that are passed genetically from parents to children
Herpes	A family of viruses that infect humans; herpes simplex causes lip and genital sores; herpes zoster causes shingles
Hesperidin	Bioflavonoids such as Hesperidin, Rutin, and Quercetin, and are vital in their ability to increase the strength of the capillaries (blood vessels) and to regulate their permeability
Hetero	Combining form meaning other, another. Different, unlike, various, diverse, abnormal or irregular
Heterogenous	Related to or derived from a different species. Not originating in the same body
Heterotopic	Grafted or transplanted into an abnormal position
HEV	Hepatitis E Virus
HF	High Fat
HFD	High Fiber Diet
Hg	Mercury
HG	High Glucose
HGF	Hepatocyte Growth Factor
HI	Hemagglutination Inhibition, inhibiting
HI Test	Hemagglutination inhibition test, a serological test used to detect antibodies specific to a particular family of viruses which possess the ability to agglutinate red blood cells e.g. measles, rubella and influenza
Hiatus Hernia	also called Hiatal Hernia. Condition in which part of the stomach slides up through the diaphragm into the chest cavity. Usually symptomless, when symptoms do occur they are usually due to a weak lower esophageal sphincter (LES) causing heartburn and not to the hiatal hernia itself. Hormones-Chemicals formed in the body that help regulate body functions, including growth, metabolism, and reproduction. They are produced by cells in one part of the body and carried in the bloodstream to other cells where they exert their effects <BR>
HIB	Hemophilus Influenza B
HIDA	Hepato Iminodiacetic Acid Scan
High Density Lipoprotein-HDL|HDL|High Density Lipoprotein	Component of blood that is involved in cholesterol transport and is associated with a lowered risk of developing atherosclerosis; it is known as the &quotgood cholesterol"
High-Grade	Possessing histological features characteristic of pathologically aggressive malignancy
Hippocratic Oath	The Hippocratic oath has been the guiding ethical code for physicians since ancient Greece. The oath contains two parts. The first specifies the duties of the physician to his teachers and his obligations in transmitting medical knowledge. The second contains rules to be observed in the treatment of diseases. One of these rules is that the physician should do no harm while trying to help the patient
Hippuric Acid	A white crystalline nitrogenous acid formed in the liver as a detoxication product of benzoic acid and present in the urine of herbivorous animals and in small quantity in human urine
Hirsutism	Excessive increase in hair growth -- especially male pattern hair growth in a female. Hirsutism is a common side effect of corticosteroids and can also occur with cyclosporine therapy, but is easily treated with depilatory creams or other methods of hair removal
Histamine	Chemical released in the body during an allergic reaction, causing inflammation; also used in medical treatment, especially to dilate capillaries
Histidase	An enzyme occurring especially in the liver of vertebrates that is capable of deaminating histidine to form urocanic acid
Histidine	An non-essential amino acid. Precursor to histamine, a vasodilator and gastric juice stimulant. Histidine is found abundantly in hemoglobin, and has been used in the treatment of anemia, rheumatoid arthritis, allergic diseases, and ulcers. A deficiency of Histidine can cause poor hearing
Histocompatibility	the examination of human leukocyte antigens (HLA) in a patient, often referred to as genetic matching or tissue typing. Tissue typing is routinely performed for all donors and recipients in kidney and pancreas transplantation to help match the donor with the most suitable recipients. This helps to decrease the likelihood of rejecting the transplanted organ
Histologic	Pertaining to the tissues
Histology	A branch of biology that studies the minute structure of tissues, including the study of cells and organs. Sometimes referred to as microscopic anatomy
Histolysis	Disintegration and dissolution of organic tissue
Histopathology	The microscopic examination of tissues
HIV	Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Human immune deficiency virus (also human immunodeficiency virus). A virus that infects T cells and leads to AIDS. HIV is a type D retrovirus that belongs to the lentivirus sub-family
HLA	Human Leukocyte Antigens. Genetically determined series of antigens that are present on human white blood cells (leukocytes) and tissues
HMM	Hexamethylmelamine
HMO	Health Maintenance Organization. A type of health plan in which a subscriber to the plan prepays for the care on a capitation basis. As long as the subscriber complies with the provisions of the plan, there are no other charges for the health care services
Hobnail Liver	The liver as it appears in one form of cirrhosis in which it is shrunken and hard and covered with small projecting nodules
Holoendemic	An infection whose prevalence is fairly uniform throughout a region, country or continent
Homeopathy	System of healing that advocates the administration of small doses of a drug that would, in healthy persons, produce symptoms of the disease being treated
Homeostasis	Maintenance of steady states in the organism by coordinated physiologic processes. Thus all organ systems are integrated by automatic adjustments to keep within narrow limits disturbances excited by, or directly resulting from, changes in the organism orin the surroundings of the organism
Homogeneous	Uniform character of all parts, Having the same nature or qualities
Homologous	Of the same essential nature, being of the same type or same series
Homologous Serum Hepatitis	Hepatitis B
Homologous Serum Jaundice	Hepatitis B
Hops	Humulus Lupuius-- Hops have been used since Roman times as a nerve tonic and sedative as well as for brewing beer. It has also been used to control diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome and Crohn's disease, where spasms of the smooth muscles play a role. Has been used to increase breast milk for irritable infants. Supporting agents are Chamomile, Hawthorne Berries, Kava Kava, Passion Flower, Skullcap, Valerian, Wood Betony, L-Trytophan, GABA. If you are pregnant or nursing, consult your physician before using Hops products. Not recommended for people suffering from depressive illness.
Horehound	Used as a remedy for coughing, and also for bronchial problems in general. Effective when used as a diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant, stimulant, and tonic. Has shown positive results in treating nervous heart conditions, and in calming overall heart action
Horizontal Survey	A study of a community, perhaps stratified by age, sex, ethnicity etc., but at one point in time or over a short time interval. Although a snapshot, horizontal surveys of prevalence and intensity within different age classes of a community can nevertheless provide valuable information on the rate at which hosts acquire infection through time, provided that the host and parasite populations have remained approximately stable for a period of time
Horizontal Transmission	Transmission occurring generally within a population, but not including vertical transmission
Hormone	One of a large class of chemicals that are secreted by glands and some organs. Hormones regulate the activities of systems, organs, tissues, and glands. They have an important role in regulating functions such as fighting infection, digestion, growth, and reproduction
Horse Chestnut	Exhibits astringent and anti-inflammatory properties. The actions of Horse Chestnut are on the vessels of the circulatory system. It seems to increase the strength & tone of the veins in particular. May be used internally to aid the body in the treatment of problems such as inflammation in the veins, phlebitis, varicosity, and hemorrhoids. Use Horse Chestnut in combination with other cardiovascular tonics such as Ginkgo, Hawthorne, Linden, and Yarrow
Horseradish	Armoracia Lapathifolia--An excellent diuretic, and is good for digestion problems. Herbalists combine horseradish and honey for coughs and asthma treatments. Externally, it can be used to alleviate the pain and stiffness caused by rheumatism. Do not take large quantities at one time; it could cause diarrhea and excessive sweating
Horsetail	Equisetum Arvense--Also called Shavegrass. The hollow, jointed stems of this flowerless plant contain large amounts of silica and silicic acids. Silica is used by the body in the production and repair of connective tissues while accelerating the healing of broken bones. Also used for its diuretic and astringent properties, making it a useful treatment for cystitis, bladder and prostate problems, and kidney stones. Bronchitis, lung and respiratory tract disorders have been shown to be helped by Horsetail, which increases the functioning and elasticity of lung tissues. It also has been shown to possess blood clotting and antibiotic activity. Horsetail also supplies calcium to the body, and is rich in several other minerals that the body uses to rebuild injured tissue. Reduces the risk of excessive bleeding and contributes to the building of healthy blood cells, and increases the number of phagocytes (enzymes that kill germs and other foreign substances), which improves the functioning of the entire immune system
HPD	Hematoporphyrin Derivative Dye, High Protein Diet, Home Peritoneal Dialysis
HpD	Hepatoporphyrin
HPLC	High Performace Liquid Chromatography
HPN	Home Parenteral Nutrition
HPP	Human Pancreatic Polypeptide
HPV	Human papillomavirus, causing genital warts and genital cancers
HPVG	Hepatic Portal Venous Gas
HSV	Herpes Simplex Virus. Types one and two, HSV-I and HSV-II, are among the causes of cold sores and genital ulcers
Huckleberry Leaf	Used to treat sugar diabetes, and ailments of the kidneys and gallbladder. This herb is one of the best for mild diabetes, and may be especially beneficial for use in "senile" diabetes
Human Papilloma Virus	One of a family of viruses which cause skin and genital warts and precancer and carcinoma of the anus, cervix, larynx (vocal cords) and lining of the nose
Humour	Normal body fluid
HV	Hepatic Vein
HVR	HypervariableRegion
Hydatid Disease	A form of echinococcosis caused by the development of hydatids of a tapeworm of the genus Echinococcus (E. granulosus) in the tissues esp. of the liver or lungs of humans and some domestic animals such as dogs and
Hyderangea	Used for treating cystitis, edema, gout, kidney and bladder stones, prostatitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and urethritis. Both a diuretic and antiseptic, and has the ability to soothe irritated tissues and reduce the formation of urinary stones
Hydragogue	Cathartic that causes copious watery discharge from the bowels
Hydrating	Having the capacity to maintain or restore the normal proportion of fluid in the body or skin
Hydration	Adding water
Hydrochloric Acid--HCI|HCI|Hydrochloric Acid	Strong acid produced in the stomach that works with pepsin and other enzymes to digest proteins
Hydrocholeresis	Increased production of watery liver bile without necessarily increased secretion of bile solids
Hydrogenation	A chemical process that changes liquid vegetable oils (unsaturated fat) into more solid saturated fat. This process increases the saturated fat content
Hydrophilia	Hydrophilia Spinosa--Considered a demulcent, and a diuretic for catarrh of the urinary organs. The dried herb and root, or rhizome, is used in India for dropsy, especially when accompanied by hepatic obstruction
Hydroxyl	Chemical group or ion OH that consists of one atom of hydrogen and one of oxygen and is neutral or positively charged
Hygroscopic	Readily taking up and retaining moisture. Glycerol is hydroscopic
Hyper	A prefix denoting excessive or above normal
Hyperalgesia	Excessive sensitiveness to pain
Hyperbaric	At higher than normal pressure or weight
Hyperbilirubinemia	Excessive concentrations of bilirubin in the blood, which may lead to jaundice; the hyperbilirubinemias are classified as conjugated or unconjugated, according to the predominant form of bilirubin in the blood
Hypercalcemia	An abnormally high concentration of calcium in the blood
Hyperemesis	Excessive vomiting
Hyperemia	Excess of blood in a part. Occurs when arterial and arteriolar dilatation produces an increased flow of blood into capillary beds. There will be an increased redness in the affected area. Cutaneous hyperemia occurs whenever excess body heat must be dissipated, such as in exercise and febrile states <BR>
Hyperemia	Increased blood flow, as in an area of inflammation
Hyperglycemia	High blood sugar
Hyperhidrosis	Excessive sweating
Hyperkalemia	Excessive potassium in the blood
Hyperlipidaemia	Increase in blood fat levels
Hyperplasia	Overgrowth or overdevelopment
Hyperpyrexia	Extreme fever
Hypersecretion	Excessive secretion
Hypersensitivity	Over-sensitivity
Hyperstimulation	Over-stimulation
Hypertension	High Blood Pressure
Hypertension, Portal|Portal Hypertension	Abnormally increased pressure in the portal venous system; frequently seen in cirrhosis of the liver and in other conditions which cause obstruction of the portal vein <BR>
Hypertonia	Stiffness
Hypertrophic	Enlarged in size, rather than in the number of components
Hypertrophy	Increase in the size of an organ
Hypervolemia	Abnormal increase in blood volume
Hypnotic	Drug or other agent that produces or tends to produce sleep without disturbing alertness and receptivness to others
Hypocalcemia	Low levels of calcium in the blood
Hypodermic	Under the skin
Hypodermic Needle	Any small needle syringe used to give an injection under the skin instead of into the deep muscle
Hypoendemic	Term used to mean (roughly) an area with little transmission
Hypoglycemia	Low blood sugar
Hypoglycin	Either of two substances from a tropical tree (Blighia sapida of the family Sapindaceae) of West Africa that induce hypoglycemia by inhibiting gluconeogenesis in the liver
Hypohemia	A lack of blood in the body
Hypokalemia	Low blood potassium
Hypoplasia	Tissue or organ underdevelopment
Hypoprothrombinemia	Deficiency of prothrombin in the blood usu. due to vitamin K deficiency or liver disease (especially obstructive jaundice) and resulting in delayed clotting of blood or spontaneous bleeding
Hypotension	Low blood pressure
Hypotensive	With low blood pressure
Hypothermia	When the body temperature reaches significantly below normal body temperatures (usually below 95 degrees)
Hypothyroidism	Underactive thyroid activity
Hypotonia	Muscle wastage
Hypouricemia	Lack of uric acid in the blood
Hypovitaminosis	Vitamin deficiency
Hypovolemia	Low blood volume
Hypoxemia	Blood oxygen deficiency
Hypoxia	Tissue oxygen deficiency. Severe deficiency of oxygen in the blood and tissues
Hyssop	Has been used effectively as an astringent, carminative, emmenagogue, expectorant, stimulant, stomachic, and tonic. Hyssop tea can be used for breast and lung problems, coughs due to colds, dropsy, flatulence, jaundice, nose and throat infections, mucous congestion in the intestines, poor digestion, and scrofula. The decoction is said to help relieve inflammations, and it can also be used as a wash for bruises, burns, and skin irritations, and as a gargle for sore throat or chronic catarrh. Apply the crushed leaves directly to bruises or to wounds to cure infection and promote healing
Hz	Hertz (cycles/second)
IAB	Intra-Abdominal
Iatrogenic	Unintended and unwanted result of treatment
IBD	Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Ibuprofen	An ingredient in certain over-the-counter (nonprescription) medications that reduce swelling, pain, and fever
IBW	Ideal Body Weight
ICD	International Classification of Disease
Iceland Moss	Cetraria Islandica--This herb is considered demulcent, tonic, and nutritive when deprived of its bitter principle. Recommended in chronic pulmonary troubles, catarrh, digestive disturbances, dysentery, and advanced tuberculosis
ICF	Intracellular Fluid
Icing Liver	Perihepatitis chronica hyperplastica
Icterus	Jaundice, Jaundiced
ID	Intraduodenal
IDST	Intraductal Secretion Test
IEL	Intraepithelial Leukocyte
IFN	Abbreviation for Interferon
IG	Immune Globulin
IG	Intragastric
IgA	Immunoglobulin
IgM - IgG	Immunoglobulin type M, type G. Vulgarisation name: antibodies
IJ	Intrajejunal
IL	2, which are only expressed by antigenically stimulated T cells. IL-2 also seems to induce production of interferon. It is used as an anticancer drug in the treatment of a wide variety of solid malignant tumors. Also
ILDL	Intermediate Low Density Lipoprotein
Ileoanal Anastomosis	Surgical procedure where the entire colon together with the diseased inner lining of the rectum is removed, leaving the outer muscle coats of the rectum intact. The end of the ileum is tunneled through the remaining rectum and joined to the anus. Because the rectal muscles and anal valve are left intact, stools can be passed normally
Ileocolitis	Inflammation of the ileum and colon
Ileostomy	Surgical creation of an opening from the ileum to the surface of the body
Ileum	Lowest part or end of the small intestine
IM	Abbreviation for intramuscular (pertaining to injections)
immature B	lymphocytes. It appears to play a role in regulating inflammatory and immune responses
Immune Adherence Reaction	Method for the detection of very small quantities of antibody in which the antigen-antibody-complement complex adheres to indicator cells, usually primate erythrocytes or nonprimate blood platelets. The reaction is dependent on the number of bound C3 molecules on the C3b receptor sites of the indicator cell
Immune Complex Diseases	Diseases caused by the formation of immune complexes in tissues or by the deposition of circulating immune complexes in tissues resulting in acute or chronic inflammation. Deposition of circulating immune complexes is generally associated with glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, synovitis, endocarditis, neuritis, and dermatitis. Locally formed complexes are involved in the pathogenesis of some autoimmune diseases. Circulating complexes may result from administration of heterologous antigens (as in serum sickness) or from the immune response to microbial antigens or tumor antigens
Immune Globulin	Hyperimmune globulin is prepared from the plasma of individuals who have high titers of antibody against a specific organism or antigen. It is derived from artificially hyperimmunized donors or from persons convalescing from natural infections. Specific immune globulins available include those for hepatitis B, rabies, tetanus, and varicella-zoster <BR>
Immune Response	The body's to specific invading antigens. The body’s protective reaction to an invasion by any disease-causing organisms or "foreign" substances
Immune Sera	Serum that contains antibody or antibodies; it may be obtained from an animal that has been immunized either by injection of antigen into the body or by infection with microorganisms containing the antigen. Antisera may be monovalent (specific for one antigen) or polyvalent (specific for more than one antigen)
Immune System	System which the body defends itself against invasion by viruses, fungi, bacteria, malignant cells and parasites. Cellular and molecular components having the primary function of distinguishing self from non-self and defense against foreign organisms or substances. The primary cellular components are lymphocytes and macrophages, and the primary molecular components are antibodies and lymphokines
Immune Tolerance	Specific failure of a normally responsive individual to make an immune response to a known antigen. It results from previous contact with the antigen by an immunologically immature individual (fetus or neonate) or by an adult exposed to extreme high-dose or low-dose antigen, or by exposure to radiation, antimetabolites, antilymphocytic serum, etc
Immunity	Physiologic state which makes the body able to recognize materials as foreign to itself and neutralize, eliminate, or metabolize them with or without injury to its own tissues
Immunity, Mucosal|Mucosal Immunity	Nonsusceptibility to the pathogenic effects of foreign microorganisms or antigenic substances as a result of antibody secretions of the mucous membranes. Mucosal epithelia in the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and reproductive tracts produce a form of IgA (IGA, Secretory) that serves to protect these ports of entry into the body <BR>
Immunoblastic Lymphadenopathy	A disease characterized by fever, itching, rash, sweating spells, weight loss, proliferation of small blood vessels and of immunoblasts, generalized lymphadenopathy, and enlargement of the liver and spleen
Immunocompromised Host	- Human or animal whose immunologic mechanism is deficient because of an immunodeficiency disorder or other disease or as the result of the administration of immunosuppressive drugs or radiation
Immunogenicity	The ability of a vaccine to stimulate the immune system, as measured by the proportion of individuals who produce specific antibody or T cells, or the amount of antibody produced
Immunoglobulin	Protein molecule functioning as a specific antibody, it will bring about the humoral phase of immunity. Five possible types of Immunoglobulin include, IgA, IgG, IgM, IgE, IgD
Immunology	Branch of medicine that focuses on the immune system, allergies and induced sensitivity. Scientific study of the bodies response to antigens
Immunomodulating	Capable of altering immunity
Immunopathology	Damage to the host caused by its own immune response against a pathogen
Immunosuppression	Prevention or diminution of the immune response, as by irradiation or by administration of antimetabolites, antilymphocyte serum, or specific antibody; also known as Immunodepression. A reduction in the capacity of the immune system. Caused by infection (eg HIV), drug treatment, pregnancy and malnutrition among others. Immunosuppressed individuals are commonly referred to as immunocompromised
Immunosuppressive Agents	Agents that suppress immune function by one of several mechanisms of action. Classical cytotoxic immunosuppressants act by inhibiting DNA synthesis. Others may act through activation of suppressor T-cell populations or by inhibiting the activation of helper cells. While immunosuppression has been brought about in the past primarily to prevent rejection of transplanted organs, new applications involving mediation of the effects of interleukins and other cytokines are emerging <BR>
Immunotherapy|Active	Active immunization where vaccine is administered for therapeutic or preventive purposes. This can include administration of immunopotentiating agents such as BCG vaccine and Corynebacterium parvum as well as biological response modifiers such as interferons, interleukins, and colony stimulating factors in order to directly stimulate the immune system
Impaction	Hardened mass of stool difficult to pass from the body
Imuran®	- Immunosuppressive drug used with other immunosuppressive drugs to help prevent the rejection of a transplanted organ. Also known by its chemical name, azathioprine
In Situ Hybridization	A technique that localizes specific nucleic acid sequences within intact chromosomes, eukaryotic cells, or bacterial cells through the use of specific nucleic acid-labeled probes
In Vitro	Latin term meaning "in glass" or "in body". The term is applied to biological processes studied experimentally in isolation from the organism
In Vivo	From the Latin meaning "in living" The term is applied the study of processes in the living organism
Incidence	The number of new infections that occurs in a given period of time. The frequency of occurrence of a condition, disease, symptom, or injury
Incision	Cut, or a wound produced by cutting with a sharp instrument
Inclusion Bodies	Strange and unusual structures found inside a host cell during virus replication
Incubation Period	The time that elapses between infection and the appearance of symptoms of a disease
IND	Investigational New Drug
Indigestion	Term used to indicate any disruption in the digestive process. Symptoms commonly include heartburn, nausea, bloating, and gas. Physicians often call it Dyspepsia
Indirect Life Cycle	A life cycle which requires one or more intermediate hosts before the definitive host species is reinfected
Indirect Transmission	Transmission of a parasite through an indirect life cycle
Indocyanine Green	A green dye used especially in testing liver blood flow and cardiac output
induce B	lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation
Infantile Liver	Biliary Cirrhosis of children
Infarction	Permanent damage to tissue or organ from interruption of its blood supply
Infected	A host who has an infection
Infection	Disease that results from the presence of harmful microorganisms in the body. The presence of a parasite within a host where it may or may not cause disease
Infectious Diarrhea	Also called Traveler's Diarrhea. Diarrheal illness caused by an infectious agent: bacterial, protozoan or viral
Infectious Disease Subspecialist	These subspecialists deal with infectious disease of all types and in all organs. Conditions requiring selective use of antibiotics call for this special skill. AIDs patients and patients with fevers which have not been explained are often diagnosed and treated by these subspecialists. Infectious disease subspecialists are experts in preventive medicine and conditions associated with travel
Infectious Period	The time period during which infecteds are able to transmit an infection to any susceptible host or vector they contact. The infectious period may not necessarily be associated with symptoms of the disease
Infiltrate	Introduce medication, typically local anesthetic, into an area of tissue
Inflammation	Localized protective response elicited by injury or destruction of tissues. Symptoms: pain, heat, swelling and redness, loss of function, involves a complex series of events, including dilatation of arterioles, capillaries, and venules, with increased permeability and blood flow; exudation of fluids, including plasma proteins; and leukocytic migration into the inflammatory focus. Condition in which the body is trying to respond to localized injury or destruction of tissues
Inflammatory Bowel Disease	Name for a group of disorders in which various parts of the intestinal tract are inflamed. Most common disorders are Crohn's Disease and Ulcerative Colitis
Inflammatory Debris	Damaged tissue and tissue-products resulting from inflammation (usually infection) rather than other pathological processes
Influenza A	Contagious infectious disease attributed to a filterable virus and causing fheadache, fever, pain in the limbs and back. Inflammation of the respiratory tract
Infusion	Extraction of the active properties of a substance by soaking or steeping it, usually in water
Ingestion	To consume orally
Inhalation	Act of drawing air into the lungs. Method of treating illness by inhaling medicinals rather than injecting or drinking them
Initial Treatment	the first time you are treated for a specific disease or ailment. Treatment after this is called Subsequent Treatment
Injection	Introduction of nutritional or medicinal materials through a needle into the body
Injection Site	Particular place on the body where the injection is made
Inlet Sinusoid	- The entry channel from a portal venule into the sinusoidal network
Innervation	Distribution or supply of nerves to a part
Inoculum	The amount of parasite to which an individual host is exposed at transmission
Inorganic Phosphorus	Hyperphosphatemia may occur in myeloma, Paget's disease of bone, osseous metastases, Addison's disease, leukemia, sarcoidosis, milk-alkali syndrome, vitamin D excess, healing fractures, renal failure, hypoparathyroidism, diabetic ketoacidosis, acromegaly, and malignant hyperpyrexia. Drugs causing serum phosphorous elevation include androgens, furosemide, growth hormone, hydrochlorthiazide, oral contraceptives, parathormone, and phosphates. Hypophosphatemia can be seen in a variety of biochemical derangements, incl. acute alcohol intoxication, sepsis, hypokalemia, malabsorption syndromes, hyperinsulinism, hyperparathyroidism, and as result of drugs, e.g., <BR>acetazolamide, aluminum-containing antacids, anesthetic agents, anticonvulsants, and estrogens (incl. oral contraceptives). Citrates, mannitol, oxalate, tartrate, and phenothiazines may produce spuriously low phosphorous by interference with the assay <BR>
Inositol	Usually considered part of the vitamin B complex. Thought that along with choline, inositol is necessary for the formation of lecithin within the body. Involved in calcium mobilization. Inositol aids in the breakdown of fats, helps reduce blood cholesterol, and even helps prevent thinning hair. A deficiency of Inositol may result in high blood cholesterol, constipation, eczema, and/or hair loss
Insoluble	An adjective that describes a substance that is incapable of being dissolved in a liquid
Insulin	Protein pancreatic hormone that is essential especially for the metabolism of carbohydrates and is used in the treatment and control of diabetes mellitus. Hormone produced in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas, concerned with the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism by controlling glucose levels in the blood. Extracted from the pancreas of pork or beef for use in treatment of diabetes
Insulin-Like Growth Factor	Either of two somatomedins that are produced in the liver and in fibroblasts, the adrenal glands, and the gonads, that are produced esp. in response to growth hormone, and that mediate growth hormone activity <BR>
Insulinase	An enzyme found especially in liver that inactivates insulin
Inter	Prefix meaning between or among
Intercostal	Between ribs
Interductal	Between ducts
Interferon	A naturally occurring chemical (protein) in the body that helps the immune system to clear viruses such as hepatitis B or C. Our livers produce at least 26 types of natural interferon. Produced by body cells in response to invasion by viruses and other intracellular parasites; it interferes with the synthesis of new virus and is effective against certain protozoal parasitic infections. Any of a group of heat stable soluble basic antiviral glycoproteins of low molecular weight that are produced usually by cells exposed to the action of a virus, sometimes to the action of another intracellular parasite (such as bacterium), or experimentally to the action of some chemicals, and that include some used medically as antiviral or antineoplastic agents
Interferon Alfa-2a	Interferon A (human leukocyte protein moiety reduced). A type I interferon consisting of 165 amino acid residues with lysine in position 23. This protein is produced by recombinant DNA technology and resembles interferon secreted by leukocytes. It is used extensively as an antiviral or antineoplastic agent
Interferon Alfa, Recombinant|Interferon Alfa|Recombinant Interferon Alfa	A type I interferon with antiviral and antineoplastic activity produced by recombinant DNA technology. Can be a mixture of the kind of interferon secreted by leukocytes or lymphoblasts <BR>
Interferon-Alpha	One of the type I interferons (Interferon Type I) produced by peripheral blood leukocytes or lymphoblastoid cells when exposed to live or inactivated virus, double-stranded RNA, or bacterial products. It is the major interferon produced by virus-induced leukocyte cultures and, in addition to its pronounced antiviral activity, causes activation of NK cells. It is used experimentally in the treatment of hairy-cell leukemia <BR>
Interferon-Alpha-2b	Interferon alpha 2b (human leukocyte clone Hif-SN 206 protein moiety reduced). Type I interferon consisting of 165 amino acid residues with arginine in position 23. This protein is produced by recombinant DNA technology and resembles interferon secreted by leukocytes. Used extensively as an antiviral or antineoplastic agent <BR>
Interferon-Gamma, Recombinant|Interferon-Gamma|Recombinant Interferon-Gamma	A type II interferon produced by recombinant DNA technology. It is similar to the interferon secreted by lymphocytes and has antiviral and antineoplastic activity<BR>
Interferon Inducers	Agents that promote the production and release of interferons. They include mitogens, lipopolysaccharides, and the synthetic polymers Poly A-U and Poly I-C. Viruses, bacteria, and protozoa have been also known to induce interferons <BR>
Interferon Type I	Interferon secreted by leukocytes, fibroblasts, or lymphoblasts in response to viruses or interferon inducers other than mitogens, antigens, or allo-antigens. They include alpha- and beta-interferons (Interferon-Alpha and Interferon-Beta) <BR>
Interferon Type II	Major interferon produced by immunologically stimulated (by mitogens or antigens) lymphocyte cultures; the primary producer cells are T lymphocytes, and the major activity is immunoregulation. IFN- has been implicated in aberrant expression of class II histocompatibility antigens by tissue cells (such as thyroid cells) that do not normally express them, leading to autoimmune disease
Interferon, Beta	The major interferon produced by double-stranded RNA-induced fibroblast cultures; the primary producer cells are fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and macrophages, and the major activity is antiviral activity. Called also epithelial, fibroblast, or fibroepithelial. One of the type I interferons produced by fibroblasts in response to stimulation by live or inactivated virus or by double-stranded RNA. It is a cytokine with antiviral, antiproliferative, and immunomodulating activity <BR>
Interferons	Any of a family of glycoproteins that exert virus-nonspecific but host-specific antiviral activity by inducing the transcription of cellular genes coding for antiviral proteins that selectively inhibit the synthesis of viral RNA and proteins. Interferons also have immunoregulatory functions (inhibition of B cell activation and antibody production enhancement of T cell activity, and enhancement of NK cell cytotoxic activity) and can inhibit the growth of nonviral intracellular parasites. Production of interferon can be stimulated by viral infection, especially by the presence of double-stranded RNA, by intracellular parasites (chlamidiae, rickettsiae), by protozoa (Toxoplasma) and by bacteria (streptococci, staphylococci) and bacterial products (endotoxins). Interferons have been divided into three distinct types associated with specific producer cells and functions, but all animal cells are able to produce interferons, and certain producer cells (leukocytes and fibroblasts) produce more than one type (both interferon- and interferon). Abbreviated IFN <BR>
Interleukin-1	Macrophage-produced interleukin that induces the production of interleukin-2 by T cells that have been stimulated by antigen or mitogen; at least two types exist, designated and IL-1 or a similar protein is also produced by epithelial cells and stimulates fibroblast proliferation and release of proteolytic enzymes (e.g., collagenase) and prostaglandins in inflammatory processes. IL-1 also appears to be identical to endogenous pyrogen. Formerly called lymphocyte-activating factor (LAF) <BR>
Interleukin-10	Factor that is a coregulator of mast cell growth. It is <BR>produced by T-cells and B-cells and shows extensive homology with the Epstein-Barr virus BCRFI gene <BR>
Interleukin-11	Lymphohematopoietic cytokine that has the ability to modulate antigen-specific antibody responses, potentiate megakaryocytes, and regulate bone marrow adipogenesis <BR>
Interleukin-12	Heterodimeric cytokine that stimulates the production of interferon gamma from T-cells and natural killer cells and also induces differentiation of TH1 cells. Consequently, it is the initiator of cell-mediated immunity <BR>
Interleukin-13	T-lymphocyte-derived cytokine that produces proliferation, immunoglobulin isotype switching, and immunoglobulin production by immature B-lymphocytes. It appears to play a role in regulating inflammatory and immune responses <BR>
Interleukin-14	Cytokine that induces B-cell proliferation, inhibits immunoglobulin secretion, and selectively expands certain B-cell subpopulations <BR>
Interleukin-15	Cytokine that stimulates the proliferation of T-lymphocytes and shares biological activities with IL-2. IL-15 also can induce B-lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation <BR>
Interleukin-16	Cytokine produced by activated T-lymphocytes that stimulates the migration of CD4-positive lymphocytes and monocytes. It has been reported to suppress HIV replication <BR>
Interleukin-2	Interleukin produced by T cells in response to antigenic or mitogenic stimulation and the signal carried by interleukin-1. It stimulates the proliferation of T cells bearing specific receptors for IL-2, which are only expressed by antigenically stimulated T cells. IL-2 also seems to induce production of interferon. It is used as an anticancer drug in the treatment of a wide variety of solid malignant tumors. Also called T-cell growth factor (TCGF) <BR>
Interleukin-3	Lymphokine produced by antigen- or mitogen-activated T lymphocytes, which stimulates proliferation of hematopoietic as well as lymphoid stem cells; a colony-stimulating factor for all bone marrow progenitor cells. IL-3 supports the growth and differentiation of early hematopoietic and lymphoid stem cells as well as that of more mature hematopoietic cells, including granulocytes, macrophages, and mast cells <BR>
Interleukin-4	Soluble factor produced by activated T-lymphocytes that causes proliferation and differentiation of B-cells. Interleukin-4 induces the expression of class II major histocompatibility complex and Fc receptors on B-cells. It also acts on T-lymphocytes, mast cell lines, and several other hematopoietic lineage cells including granulocyte, megakaryocyte, and erythroid precursors, as well as macrophages <BR>
Interleukin-5	Factor promoting eosinophil differentiation and activation in hematopoiesis. It also triggers activated B-cells for a terminal differentiation into Ig-secreting cells <BR>
Interleukin-6	Factor that stimulates the growth and differentiation of human B-cells and is also a growth factor for hybridomas and plasmacytomas. It is produced by many different cells including T-cells, monocytes, and fibroblasts <BR>
Interleukin-7	Hematopoietic growth factor that promotes growth of B-cell precursors and also is co-mitogenic with Interleukin-2 for mature T-cell activation. It is produced by bone marrow stromal cells <BR>
Interleukin-8	Cytokine that activates neutrophils and attracts <BR>neutrophils and T-lymphocytes. It is released by several cell types including macrophages, monocytes, T-lymphocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts and keratinocytes by an inflammatory stimulus. IL-8 is a member of the beta-thromboglobulin superfamily. Structurally related to platelet factor 4 <BR>
Interleukin-9	Factor that is thought to be a regulator of hematopoiesis. It has been shown to enhance the growth of human mast cells and megakaryoblastic leukemic cells as well as murine helper t-cell clones. IL-9 is a glycoprotein with a molecular weight of 32-39 that is derived from T-cells, and maps to human chromosome 5 <BR>
Interleukin Receptors	Cell surface proteins that bind interleukins and trigger intracellular changes influencing the behavior of cells
Interleukins	Generic term for a group of protein factors produced by macrophages and T cells in response to antigenic or mitogenic stimulation and affecting primarily T cells
Internal Medicine	Branch of medicine dealing especially with the diagnosis and medical treatment of disorders and diseases of the internal structures of the human body
International Unit|IU	IU--Quantity of a biologically active substance required to produce a specific response. This unit is often used to express a dosage amount
Interstitial	Situated within but not restricted to or characteristic of a particular organ or tissue, Affecting the interstitial tissues of an organ or part, Occuring in the part of a fallopian tube in the wall of the uterus
Intestinal Flora	Name for the bacteria, fungi and yeasts, that normally grow in the intestinal tract
Intestinal Mucosa	Intestinal lining. Surface lining of the intestines in which the process of absorption occurs
Intra	Prefix meaning within, into or during
Intrahepatic	Situated or occurring within or originating in the liver
Intravenous	Injected into a vein. Also called IV
Intravenous Drugs	Drugs that are injected by a needle directly into a vein
Intravenous Feeding	Procedure in which necessary fluids, nutrients and salts, are supplied to the body by way of the veins <BR>
Intubation	Insertion of an endotracheal tube to help an unconscious patient breathe
Inversion	Turning inward, inside out, upside down, or other reversal of normal relation of a part
Investigational Drug	New drug that is undergoing clinical trials to try and prove its safety and effectiveness
Iodine	Essential mineral that is an integral part of the thyroid hormones, thyroxin and triodothyronine which have important metabolic roles and govern basal metabolism. Iodine aids in the development and functioning of the thyroid gland, regulates the body's production of energy, and helps burn excess fat by stimulating the rate of metabolism. The best known iodine deficiency symptom is goiter. Other iodine deficiency problems are reduced vitality, hypothyrodism, inability to think clearly, low resistance to infection, loss of control of the muscles of the mouth resulting in mouth contortion and drooling, defective teeth, tendency to obesity and cretinism which is a congenital abnormal condition marked by physical stunting and mental deficiency
Ion	Atom or group of atoms that has acquired an electric charge through the gain or loss of an electron or electrons
IPPB	Iintermittent Positive Pressure Breathing
Iridin	An oleoresin prepared from the common blue flag for use as a purgative and liver stimulant
Irish Moss	Also known as Carrageen and pearl moss. Used effectively as a demulcent and mucilaginous. Irish moss is considered an excellent remedy for bronchitis, coughs, tuberculosis, and intestinal problems. In its raw form, it is used as a bulk laxative, which coats and soothes the entire gastrointestinal tract. In various forms, it relieves peptic and duodenal ulcers in humans without having any adverse effects on the colon
Iron	Essential mineral. Iron's major function is to combine with protein and copper in making hemoglobin. Prevents anemia: as a constituent of hemoglobin, transports oxygen throughout the body. Virtually all of the oxygen used by cells in the life process are brought to the cells by the hemoglobin of red blood cells. Iron is a small but most vital, component of the hemoglobin in 20,000 billion red blood cells, of which 115 million are formed every minute. Serum iron may be increased in hemolytic, megaloblastic, and aplastic anemias, and in hemochromatosis, acute leukemia, lead poisoning, pyridoxine deficiency, thalassemia, excessive iron therapy, and after repeated transfusions. Drugs causing increased serum iron include chloramphenicol, cisplatin, estrogens (including oral contraceptives), ethanol, iron dextran, and methotrexate. Iron can be decreased in iron deficiency anemia, acute and chronic infections, carcinoma, nephrotic syndrome, hypothyroidism, in protein- calorie malnutrition, and after surgery. The iron assay is one of the less reliable tests on screening panels, so any abnormalities should be followed with other inquiry concerning iron metabolism (history of blood loss, alcohol consumption, lab tests for TIBC, ferritin, etc) before undertaking therapeutic interventions. A deficiency of iron may result in general weakness, paleness of skin, constipation, and/or anemia
Iron Liver	The condition of the liver in hepatic siderosis
Irrigate	Wash out a wound or operative field with a cleansing fluid
Irrigation	Washing out of a wounded surface or cavity with a stream of fluid
Irritable Bowel Syndrome	Also called IBS, Mucous Colitis, Spastic Colon. Common functional disorder characterized by abdominal pain, gas, diarrhea or constipation or alternately by both
Irritant	Substance that produces irritation or inflammation of the skin or internal tissue
IS	Immune System
Ischemia	When the heart is starving for oxygen
Islets of Langerhans	Irregular microscopic structures, varying from a few to hundreds of cells, scattered throughout the pancreas and comprising its endocrine portion. There are three cell types: alpha, secreting glucagon; beta, secreting insulin; and delta, secreting somatostatin
Isoantigens	Antigens that exist in alternative (allelic) forms in a species, and thus induce an immature response when one form is transferred (as by blood transfusion or tissue graft) to members of the species who lack it. Typical isoantigens are the blood group antigens
Isoleucine	Essential amino acid. Essential for proper growth in infants and for nitrogen balance in adults
itself. Hormones	Chemicals formed in the body that help regulate body functions, including growth, metabolism, and reproduction. They are produced by cells in one part of the body and carried in the bloodstream to other cells where they exert their effects
IU	International Units
IV	Intravenous
IV Catheter	Small needle with a hollow tube inserted into a vein and used to give medicines or fluids
IV Push	Injecting medication rapidly into a vein to hit the blood system all at once
IVDA	Intravenous Drug Abuse
IVDU	Intravenous Drug User
IVH	Intravenous Hyperalimentation
IVIG	Intravenous gamma globulin
IVN	Intravenous Nutrition
IVU	Intravenous Urography
Jamaican Dogwood	A powerful sedative
Jaundice	A yellowing of the skin, sclerae, and other tissues due to excess circulating bilirubin. Mild jaundice, best seen by examining the sclerae in natural light, is usually detectable when serum bilirubin reaches 2 to 2.5 mg/dL, decreased ability to metabolize bilirubin
Jejunum	Section of the small intestine between the duodenum and ileum
JI	Jejunoileal
JIB	Jejunoileal Bypass
Joint Arthropathy	Any disease which effects the bony joints of the body
JS	Jejunal Segment
Jugale	Craniometric point at the union of the temporal and frontal processes of the zygomatic bone
Juxta	Combining form meaning situated near or adjoining
K	Symbol for Potassium
K-Y|K-Y jelly	K-Y jelly. A widely used watersoluble lubricant
Kalium	Potassium
Kaposi's Sarcoma or Syndrome|Kaposi's Sarcoma|Kaposi's Syndrome	Multiple idiopathic hemorrhagic sarcoma
Kary, Karyo|Kary|Karyo	A combining form meaning nucleus, nuclear
Kava Kava Root	Piper Methysticum. Shrub which is a member of the pepper family.,Kava has traditionally been used for its relaxing effects. The combination of root powder and standardized root extract provides the important kavalactones required for this feeling of well being and harmony. Absorption in the gastrointestinal tract is rapid, so the effects are felt almost immediately. Kava's muscle-relaxant properties are similar to those of potent tranquilizers as they both act on the central nervous system. Kava root is primarily used as a natural sedative and sleep inducer. It is also effective in reducing menstrual cramps. Kava is not recommended for those who intend to drive or conduct any activity which requires fast reaction time. Driving or operating heavy or dangerous equipment is not recommended while under the influence of Kava Kava, as drowsiness can occur. Kava Kava use is contraindicated during pregnancy or nursing, and in cases of depression. Do not take for more than 3 months, or more than 1,000 mg. per day without medical advice. Extended continuous intake can cause a temporary yellow discoloration of skin, hair and nails, in which case it must be discontinued. Discontinue use if dilation of pupils or disturbances of coordination between vision and movement occur
Kay Ciel	A potassium supplement
kcal	Kilocalorie (food calorie)
Kelp	Fucus Vesiculosus. Usually refers to seaweeds of the brown alga order Laminariales which possess large, flat, leaflike fronds. Excellent source of minerals from the sea, particularly iodine which is very important for the thyroid gland to function properly. Provides nutritional support to the nervous system and heart in the form of iodine, minerals, vitamins and cell salts. Beneficial to the sensory nerves, membranes surrounding the brain, brain tissue and spinal cord. Used for hair loss, goiter, obesity and ulcers. Good for thyroid function, arteries, and nails. Also an important general and nutritive tonic herb which aids in the treatment of constipation & gastrointestinal ailments, heart disease, high blood pressure, infectious disease, obesity, respiratory disease, rheumatism & arthritis, and thyroid deficiency. Kelp provides nutritive support to the entire body, and improves circulatory stimulation. As well as lowering blood cholesterol levels
Keratin	Any of family of scleroproteins that for the epidermis, hair, nails and horny tissues
Keratinization	Process of replacing skin after sores or ulcers
Keratosis	Any horny growth such as a wart or callosity
Ketone Bodies	Acetoacetic acid, acetone, and beta-hydroxybutyrate present in excess in the blood and urine of diabetics
kg	kilogram
Kidney	one of the two kidney-bean-shaped organs located on both sides of the spine, just above the waist. They rid the body of waste materials and maintain fluid balance through the production of urine
Killer T-Cell	T-lymphocytes that have cytotoxic activity against target cells coated with a specific antibody
Knotgrass	Polyganum Aviculare--Also called Cowgrass, Hogweed, Pigweed, Pigrush, Bird's Tongue and Sparrow Tongue. Has astringent and diuretic properties. Used as an infusion of it useful in bleeding piles, diarrhea, and all hemorrhages. Used as a fresh juice has been found effectual to stay bleeding of the nose, squirted up the nose and applied to the temples, and made into an ointment it has proved an excellent remedy for sores
Knotted Figwort	Scrophularia Nodosa--Also called Scrofula Plant. Has anodyne and diuretic properties. Used mainly for inflammations, sprains, swellings, wounds and diseased parts, especially in scrofulous sores and gangrene. The leaves are bitter, acrid and nauseating, producing purging and vomiting if chewed
Kola Nut	Also called Cola Nut and Cola. Central nervous system stimulant, diuretic antidepressant, and astringent. Due to its caffeine content, Kola Nut may relieve some migraine headaches. The phenolics and anthrocyanin are likely to provide antioxidant activity. Used for for enduring fatigue without food; stimulating a weak heart; and treating nervous debility, anxiety, brooding, depression, despondency, lack of emotion, nervous diarrhea, sea sickness and weakness. Do not use when caffeine is contraindicated. If you are pregnant or nursing, consult your physician before using Kola Nut
KUB	Shorthand for kidney, ureter, and bladder tests
Kupffer Cells	Fixed macrophages lining the hepatic sinusoid
L	Liver. Liter
L-Carnitine	A free amino acid. Believed to help the body protect itself against diseases of the liver, kidneys, cardiovascular system and muscles. It has shown some beneficial effects for treating diabetes, and there is evidence that L-carnitine helps build muscle tissue
L Protein|Hepatitis B Virus	involved in virus morphogenesis; has been sequenced
L-Thyroxine	The major natural hormone produced by the thyroid gland, given in synthetic form to counter under activity of the gland
Labile	Unstable
Laceration	Tear
Lacrimal	Tear related
Lactase	Intestinal enzyme that is needed to digest lactose
Lactic Acid	A byproduct of carbohydrate metabolism (anaerobic metabolism). A lactic acid level may be measured in the bloodstream in conditions of metabolic acidosis
Lactic Acid Levels	A test that measures the amount of lactic acid in the blood. Lactic acid is an intermediate product of carbohydrate metabolism and is derived mainly from muscle cells and red blood cells. Exercise will normally raise lactic acid levels. Conditions of oxygen deprivation (e.g. heart failure, lung disease, shock) will trigger anaerobic metabolism within muscle tissue resulting in lactic acid build up in the tissues. Normal lactic acid levels are 4.5 to 19.8 mg/dl.
Lactic Dehydrogenase	Also see LDH, Increase of LD activity in serum may occur in any injury that causes loss of cell cytoplasm. More specific information can be obtained by LD isoenzyme studies. Also, elevation of serum LD is observed due to in vivo effects of anesthetic agents, clofibrate, dicumarol, ethanol, fluorides, imipramine, methotrexate, mithramycin, narcotic analgesics, nitrofurantoin, propoxyphene, quinidine, and sulfonamides. Decrease of serum LD is probably not clinically significant
Lactose	Complex sugar found in milk and milk products. Lactose must be broken down into the simple sugars galactose and glucose to be absorbed
Lactose Intolerance	Common condition in which a person does not produce enough lactase to digest the lactose in milk/products. Commonly associated with diarrhea and abdominal cramping after drinking milk or eating dairy products. This problem is present in over 80 percent of nonwhite adults
Lactulose	Drug used to treat chronic constipation and disturbances of function in the central nervous system accompanying severe liver disease, also used to treat encephalopathy (brain fog)
Lady's Mantle	Alchemilla Vulgaris. Used topically on wounds to stop bleeding and promote healing. Taken internally, it is used to regulate menstruation and stimulate the appetite. Also makes a soothing douche for mild vaginal irritations
Laennec's Cirrhosis	Also called Portal Cirrhosis. Hepatic cirrhosis in which increased connective tissue spreads out from the portal spaces compressing and distorting the lobules, causing impairment of liver function, and ultimately producing the typical hobnail liver
Lancet Fluke	Small liver fluke of the genus, mainly found in cattle and sheep and rarely infects humans
Laparoscope	Endoscope that is used to examine the peritoneal (abdominal) cavity and the surface the organs it contains
Laparoscopy	Examination of the interior of the abdominal cavity by a lighted tube
Laparotomy	An incision into the abdomen or loin, for diagnostic and/or surgical purposes
Lardaceous Liver	Albuminoid liver
large|dense|protein	fat particles composed of a moderate proportion of protein and a high proportion of cholesterol. Higher levels of LDL's are associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular disease. The ideal LDL cholesterol blood level in the United States ranges from 60 mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter of blood) to 160 mg/dL. The value of blood LDL cholesterol level by itself is limited. It should be compared to other blood lipid levels such as Total Cholesterol, HDL (High Density Lipopritein) Cholesterol, and triglycerides to draw accurate conclusions about diagnosis and treatment
Large Intestine	Part of the intestinal tract that extends from the ileum to the anus. The large intestine is divided into the appendix, colon, (ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid), cecum, colon , anus and rectum
Lasix	A drug for diuresis, gets its name in that it usually lasts six hours. For Water Retention
Lassitude	Wearniness
Latency	In order to increase their chances of survival and successful avoidance of the immune system, many viruses lie dormant for a defined period before reproducing within their host cells, or many launch periodic infections and reinfections of a host over a period of years, even a lifetime. This period is known as latency
Latent Infection	Viral infection in which the virus responsible is able to avoid the hosts immune system and defenses.Viruses which are able to down-regulate their gene expression can establish a truly latent state, i.e. with strictly limited gene expression and without ongoing virus replication. Latent virus infections typically persist for the entire life of the host <BR>
Latent Period	Inactive period. The time from infection to when the individual is infectious to others. Not the same as the incubation period
Lateral	Towards the side. To the right or left of the middle line of the body or other reference point
Lavender	Used as an antispasmodic, carminative, cholagogue, diuretic, dizziness, fainting, flatulence, migraine headache, sedative, stimulant, stomachic, tonic. Shown to have some antiseptic properties and is useful against putrefactive bacteria in the intestines
Laxative	Substance used to produce bowel movement and relieve constipation; mild purgative
lb	Pound
LCAT	Lechithin Cholesterol Acyltransferase
LCT	Long Chain Triglyceride
LD	Liver Disease, Also See Lactic Dehydrogenase
LDH	Lactic Dehydrogenase, commonly included in automated analysis, is insensitive as an indicator of hepatocellular injury but is better as a marker for hemolysis or MI. It might be quite high with malignancies involving the liver. Also see Lactic Dehydrogenase
LDL	Low Density Lipoprotein, Also known as &quotbad" cholesterol, LDL's are large, dense, protein-fat particles composed of a moderate proportion of protein and a high proportion of cholesterol. Higher levels of LDL's are associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular disease. The ideal LDL cholesterol blood level in the United States ranges from 60 mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter of blood) to 160 mg/dL. The value of blood LDL cholesterol level by itself is limited. It should be compared to other blood lipid levels such as Total Cholesterol, HDL (High Density Lipopritein) Cholesterol, and triglycerides to draw accurate conclusions about diagnosis and treatment <BR>
LDL-C	Low Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
LDLP	Low Density Lipoprotein
LDS	Liver Damage Score
LE	Lupus Erythematosus
Lecithin	Also called Phosphatidylcholine. Lecithin contains Choline & Inositol which are essential for the breakdown of fats and cholesterol. Lecithin helps prevent arterial congestion, cleans the liver, purifies the kidneys, helps distribute bodyweight, increases immunity to virus infections. Especially important to prevent arteriosclerosis, protect against cardiovascular disease, and increase brain function, Lecithin is known to promote energy, and is needed to help repair damage to the liver caused by alcoholism. Essential for the metabolism of fats and are used in the processing of foods. Deficiency leads to hepatic and renal disorders, high serum cholesterol levels, atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis. Waxy substance found in bile that assists the bile salts in dissolving fats. Forms colloidal solutions in water, and have emulsifying, wetting, and antioxidant properties
Leiomyoma	A benign tumor of muscle of internal organs
Lemon Balm	Melissa Officinalis--Also called balm mint, bee balm, blue balm, cure-all, dropsy plant, garden balm, lemon balm, melissa, and sweet balm. Used as an antispasmodic, calmative, carminative, diaphoretic, emmenagogue, and stomachic. Remedy for common female complaints, and is useful for all sorts of nervous problems, including hysteria, melancholy and insomnia. Balm tea is used to relieve chronic bronchial catarrh, cramps, colic, dyspepsia, flatulence, migraine, toothache, and some forms of asthma and during pregnancy, for headaches and dizziness. Lemon Balm has the ability to heal wounds, ease indigestion, fight cold sores, relieve menstrual cramps, relax nerves, soothe minor wounds , insect stings, helps prevent sleeplessness and repel mosquitoes <BR>
LES	Lower Esophageal Sphincter
Lesion	Injury, Wound. Circumscribed pathological alteration of tissue
Lesser Omentum	A part of the peritoneum attached to the liver and to the lesser curvature of the stomach and supporting the hepatic vessels
Lethargy	Lowered level of consciousness marked by listlessness, drowsiness
Leucine	Essential amino acid. White, crystalline amino acid essential for optimal growth in infants and nitrogen equilibrium in adults. Cannot be synthesized by the body and is obtained by the hydrolysis of food protein during pancreatic enzyme digestion
Leukocyte	White blood cell which appears 5,000 to 10,000 times in each cubic millimeter of normal human blood. Among the most important functions are destroying bacteria, fungi and viruses and rendering harmless poisonous substances that may result from allergic reactions and cell injury
Leukocytic	White blood cell related
Leukocytosis	Increased white blood cell count
Leukopenia	Reduced white blood cell count
LeVeen Shunt	A plastic tube that passes from the jugular vein to the peritoneal cavity where a valve permits absorption of ascitic fluid which is carried back to venous circulation by way of the superior vena cava
Levin Tube	A tube designed to be passed into the stomach or duodenum through the nose
Lichen	Name applied to many different kinds of papular skin diseases
Licorice	Glycyrrhiza Glabra. About ninety percent of this herb is used in flavoring tobacco products. Licorice is about fifty times sweeter than sugar and comes in a commercial form known as ammoniated glycyrrhizin. Used to treat bladder problems, coughs, fevers, food poisoning, hoarseness, inflammation, kidney problems, liver and uterine problems, malaria, respiratory problems, sore throats, and stomach problems. A remedy for arthritis due to its anti-inflammatory properties; it stimulates the production of two natural steroids: aldosterone and cortisone. Also acts as a demulcent, diuretic, expectorant, and laxative. Stimulates the production of bile by the liver and can relieve stomach aches and ulcers. Can also lower cholesterol. If you have a history of congestive heart failure, kidney disease, and liver disorders should not use licorice compounds. If you are pregnant or nursing, consult your physician before using this product. People with a history of renal failure or those currently using cardiac glycosides may wish to avoid use of Licorice as a precautionary measure
Life Expectancy	Longevity, the average length of life of individuals in a population
Ligamentum Venosum	A cord of tissue connected to the liver that is the vestige of the ductus venosus
Ligature	Any substance, such as catgut, cotton, silk or wire used to tie a vessel or strangulate a part
Lignin	Major noncarbohydrate kind of dietary fiber. A natural plastic binder for cellulose fibers. Together with cellulose, lignin forms the woody cell walls of vegetables and other plants and the cementing material between them
Limbic	Edge related, Marginal
Limbido	Sexual desire
Limy Bile	Bile containing an increased amount of calcium, usually as the carbonate but sometimes as the phosphate or bilirubinate. It varies in consistency from a thick, milky fluid to a putty, gel, or solid. It is usually suspended in a thin, more watery bile. Called also milk of calcium bile <BR>
Linament	Medicinal substance, thinner than an ointment, is gently rubbed into the skin for relief from pain of sprains and bruises
Linden	Exhibits anti-inflammatory, anti-spasmodic, astringent, diaphoretic, diuretic, emmenagogue, hypotensive, nervine properties. A specific in the treatment of raised blood pressure associated with arteriosclerosis and nervous tension. Used in the treatment of some forms of migraine
Linear	A process is linear if doubling the starting conditions doubles the outcome. For example, the number of new schistosome infections establishing in mice is directly proportional to the number of cercaria the mice are exposed to, over a certain range. Outside this range, the response is nonlinear: there is no longer a direct proportionality
Lipid	Lipide--Fat, and fat-like materials which, together with proteins and carbohydrates, constitute the main structural substances in the living cell. Any of various substances that are soluble in nonpolar organic solvents, that with proteins and carbohydrates constitute the principal structural components of living cells, and that include waxes, fats, cerebrosides, phospholipids, and related and derived compounds
Lipid Metabolism	Conversion of fatty materials to energy and by-products
Lipidosis	A disorder of fat metabolism particularly involving the deposition of fat in an organ such as the liver or spleen
Lipodystrophy	Fat metabolism disturbance
Lipoic Acid	Sulfur-containing coenzyme used in the energy process and is also a powerful antioxidant. Has been used therapeutically in the treatment of AIDS and diabetes because of the synergy between alpha-lipoic acid and vitamin E and the interlocking cycles which lead to better optimization of antioxidant nutrients
Lipophilic	With an affinity for fat
Lipoprotein	Any complex of fat and protein. Complex particles made of proteins, lipids and cholesterol. According to their density when separated by ultracentrifugation, a distinction is made between the low-density (LDL) and the high-density (HDL) lipoprotein <BR>
Liposome	Fatty or oily globule
Liposterol	Fat soluble sterols. Sterols are a large subgroup of steroids containing an OH group at position 3 on the carbon chain and a branched aliphatic side chain of eight or more carbon atoms at position 17
LIQ	Left Inner Quadrant
Liquefaction	The transformation of a gas into a liquid
Liquor	Solution of medicinal substances in water
Lithiasis	Condition characterized by the formation of calculi and concretions
Lithotripsy	Breaking up the renal calculi (kidney stones) with sound waves so they can be passed in the urine
Livedo	Mottled discoloration of the skin
Liver	Large tubular vertebrate gland that secretes bile and acts in the formation of blood and in the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins &amp; minerals. Our bodies filtering system. 2. Large gland of a dark-red color situated in the upper part of the abdomen on the right side. Also called Hepar. Its domed upper surface fits closely against and is adherent to the inferior surface of the right diaphragmatic dome, and it has a double blood supply from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. It comprises thousands of minute lobules (lobuli hepatitis), the functional units of the liver. Its manifold functions include the storage and filtration of blood, the secretion of bile, the excretion of bilirubin and other substances formed elsewhere in the body, and numerous metabolic functions, essential to life. 3. A large very vascular glandular organ of vertebrates that secretes bile and causes important changes in many of the substances contained in the blood which passes through it (such as converting sugars into glycogen which it stores up until required and by forming urea) and that in humans is the largest gland in the body, weighs from 40 to 60 ounces (1100 to 1700 grams), is a dark red color, and occupies the upper right portion of the abdominal cavity immediately below the diaphragm <BR>
Liver Abscess	Solitary or multiple collections of pus within the liver. It is usually associated with systemic manifestations of toxemia and clinical signs of disease in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen
Liver Abscess, Amebic	Liver abscess caused by Entamoeba Histolytica
Liver Biopsy	Microscopic examination of tissue removed from the liver to look for the presence of inflammation and liver damage
Liver Cancer	A malignant tumor of the liver
Liver Cell	Hepatocyte
Liver Circulation	Circulation of blood through the vessels of the liver
Liver Cirrhosis	Liver disease in which the normal microcirculation, the gross vascular anatomy, and the hepatic architecture have been variably destroyed and altered with fibrous septa surrounding regenerated or regenerating parenchymal nodules <BR>
Liver Cirrhosis, Biliary|Biliary Liver Cirrhosis|Liver Cirrhosis	Liver cirrhosis in which there is interference with intrahepatic bile flow. It includes primary biliary cirrhosis, an intrahepatic disturbance of bile secretion affecting predominantly middle-aged women and with segmental destruction and, later, absence of septal bile ducts (cirrhosis is the end stage); and secondary biliary cirrhosis, which is produced by prolonged mechanical obstruction of large intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile ducts <BR>
Liver Cytosol Antigen Type 1	Protein of MW 240-290 kDa (human) & 220-270 kDa (rat); autoantibodies to LC1ag may be a more specific marker for autoimmune chronic active hepatitis type 2
Liver Diseases, Alcoholic|Alcoholic Liver Diseases|Liver Diseases	Liver diseases associated with alcoholism. It usually refers to the coexistence of two or more subentities, i.e., alcoholic fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and alcoholic liver cirrhosis, but may be the general entity when subentities are not specified <BR>
Liver Diseases,  Parasitic|Liver Diseases|Parasitic Liver Diseases	Infections of the liver with a parasite. They are caused most commonly by trematodes (flukes)
Liver Extracts	Brownish, somewhat hygroscopic powder prepared from mammalian livers; used as a hematopoietic
Liver Failure	Severe inability of the liver to carry out its normal functions or the demands made upon it. Symptoms include severe jaundice and abnormal levels of ammonia, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, lactic dehydrogenase, and reversal of the albumin/globulin ratio
Liver Failure, Acute|Acute Liver Failure|Liver Failure	Form of liver failure with rapid onset. Often induced by the toxic effect of drugs and various toxic substances in experimental studies in animals and in clinical states in humans. If coma ensues, the constellation of neurological symptoms is referred to as Hepatic Encephalopathy <BR>
Liver Fluke	Any of several parasitic tremarode worms that infest the liver of various animals including humans
Liver Glycogen	Glycogen stored in the liver
Liver Neoplasms|Experimental	Experimentally induced tumors of the liver
Liver Regeneration	Repair or renewal of hepatic tissue
Liver Related Donor	LRD--Blood relative who donates an organ
Liver Rot	A disease that is caused by liver flukes particularly in cattle and sheep and is marked by anemia, sluggishness, and wasting and by local damage to the liver
Liver-Specific Transcription Factor LF-B1	From rat liver nuclear extract; plays dominant role in cell-type specific transcription of albumin promoter: interacts with liver-specific gene promoters
Liver Spots	Spots of darker pigmentation on the skin. Some refer to them as age spots
Liver Transplant	The transfer of a healthy liver from one individual to another
Liver, Artificial|Artificial liver|liver	Devices for simulating the activities of the liver. They often consist of a hybrid between both biological and artificial materials
Liverish	Having a liver disorder, Bilious
Liverleaf	The Hepatica
Liverwort|American	Anemone Hepatica. Used as a mild remedy in disorders of the indigestion, liver, etc. Possesses pectoral properties it is used in the treatment of coughs, bleeding of the lungs and diseases of the chest
Livery	Suggesting liver disorder
LLQ	Left Lower Quadrant
Lobe	Subdivision of an organ (liver) or part bounded by fissures, structural boundaries or connective tissue
Lobectomy	Surgical excision of a lobe
Lobed	Having lobes
Lobelia	An excellent expectorant. Reduces inflammation and stimulates respiration. Has been used especially for its antispasmodic qualities to treat asthma and whooping cough. Given in large amounts it will induce vomiting. It has a general depressant action on the central and autonomic nervous system, and also on the neuro-muscular action. Primary use is in the treatment of bronchitic asthma and bronchitis. Powerful respiratory stimulant. Externally, this herb can be made into a poultice for bruises, erysipelas, felons, insect bites, ringworm, sprains, and poison ivy irritation
Lobular	Fatty degeneration of the liver. Of, relating to, affecting, or resembling a lobule
Lobulated	Having more than one lobe or part
Lobule	A small lobe, (like the ear), A subdivision of a lobe; specif : one of the small masses of tissue of which various organs (such as the liver) are made up
Local Therapy	Treatment that affects a tumor and the tissue near it
longitudinal cross	sectional study
Longitudinal Study	A study taking place over time. If individuals are followed, this is a longitudinal cohort study. If individuals are not followed, but classes (usually age classes) are restudied, this is a longitudinal cross-sectional study <BR>
Loosestrife	Also called Long Purples, Milk Willow herb, Purple loose strife, Purple Willow herb, Rainbow weed, Spiked Loosestrife, Spiked Willow herb, Soldiers, and Willow Sage. Has been used effectively as an astringent and styptic. Effective against diarrhea, simple diarrhea associated dysentery and typhoid fever. The infusion or fluid extract is also used for gastroenteritis and is particularly useful for diarrhea in infants. Helps to stop internal bleeding, works without producing constipation
Lovage	Levisticum Officinale. Has diuretic and carminative actions. Used in disorders of the stomach and fever, especially for cases of colic and flatulence in children, its expelling flatulence, inducing perspiration and opening obstructions
Lovastatin	A drug that decreases the level of cholesterol in the bloodstream by inhibiting the liver enzyme that controls cholesterol synthesis and is used in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia
low	density (LDL) and the high-density (HDL) lipoprotein
Low Density Lipoprotein-LDL	A type of fat in the blood, measured as cholesterol, which when pathologically increased promotes narrowing of the arteries
Lower Esophageal Sphincter	LES. Muscle fibers near the junction of the esophagus and the stomach. Designated to function as a one way valve. Normally the LES relaxes with swallowing to allow food to pass from the esophagus to the stomach, but stays tight the rest of the time to prevent the backflow of stomach contents into the esophagus
LRD	Liver Related Donor
Lucid	Clear, not obscure
Lumbricoid	Parasitic worm, usually the roundworm Ascaris
Lumen	Inside of a tube. In the intestine, it is the channel through which unabsorbed food, secretions, and wastes flow
Lungwort	Pulmonaria Officinalis. Good expectorant, breaks up chest congestion. Soothes throat irritation and helps cure diarrhea. Used for coughs, hoarseness, and mild lung problems
Lupoid Hepatitis	Chronic active hepatitis associated with Lupus Erythematosus
Lupus	Name originally given to localized destruction or degeneration of the skin caused by various cutaneous lesions
LUQ	Left Upper Quadrant
Lymph	Almost colorless fluid that travels through the lymphatic system and carries cells that help fight infection
Lymph Glands	See Lymph Nodes
Lymph Nodes	Small, bean-shaped organs located along the channels of the lymphatic system. Lymph nodes store special cells that can trap bacteria or cancer cells traveling through the body in lymph
Lymphadenitis	Swollen Glands
Lymphatic System	Tissues and organs that produce, carry, and store cells that fight infection and disease. This system includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph vessels, and lymph nodes
Lymphatic Tissue	A specialised form of body tissue which contains large numbers of lymphocytes
Lymphocyte	Small white cell which normally includes 25% of the total white blood cell count but increases in number in response to infection. T and B lymphocytes are responsible for all specific recognition of antigens
Lymphocytes	White blood cell formed in lymphoid tissue as in the lymph nodes, thymus, spleen tonsils. Constitutes about 22-28% of all leukocytes in normal human's blood. Lymphocytosis is seen in infectious mononucleosis, viral hepatitis, cytomegalovirus infection, other viral infections, pertussis, toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, TB, syphilis, lymphocytic leukemias, and lead, carbon disulfide, tetrachloroethane, and arsenical poisonings. A mature lymphocyte count more than 7,000/uL is an individual over 50 years of age is highly suggestive of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Drugs increasing the lymphocyte count include aminosalicyclic acid, griseofulvin, haloperidol, levodopa, niacinamide, phenytoin, and mephenytoin. Lymphopenia is characteristic of AIDS. It is also seen in acute infections, Hodgkin's disease, systemic lupus, renal failure, carcinomatosis, and with administration of corticosteroids, lithium, mechlorethamine, methysergide, niacin, and ionizing irradiation. Of all hematopoietic cells lymphocytes are the most sensitive to whole-body irradiation, and their count is the first to fall in radiation sickness <BR>
Lymphocytic	White blood cell related
Lymphoma	Cancer of the lymphoid tissues
Lymphopoiesis	Formation of lymphocytes
Lyophilisate	Freeze-dry
Lysine	Essential amino acid. Important for growth, tissue repair, and the production of hormones, enzymes and antibodies. Research indicates that lysine may be useful in the treatment of migraine and herpes simplex. Precursor to carnitine in the body. Lysine insures the adequate absorption of calcium; helps form collagen (which makes up bone cartilage & connective tissues). A deficiency of Lysine may result in anemia, hair loss, inability to concentrate, irritability, bloodshot eyes, reproductive problems, retarded growth, and tiredness
Lysis	Mobilization of an organ by division of restrainnig adhesions, Surgical freeing
Lysosome	Special structures within cells that contain powerful enzymes capable of breaking down organic materials, used for the recycling of materials within the cell, and the destruction of a cell, in some circumstances
Lytes	(Slant)--Abbreviation for an electrolyte analysis
Lytic	Cell destruction related
M	Molar
m	meter
M1	Early stage of distant spread of a malignant tumor
Ma Huang	Also called Ephedra. Directs the flow of blood to the muscles, increases the oxygen and nutrient supply resulting in greater energy and endurance. Slight stimulatory action on the central nervous system. This produces alertness, enhances mood, and reduces fatigue. Mobilizes white fat stores into the bloodstream where they are carried to the brown fat to be burned up and dissipated as heat. Dries up the sinuses and has a bronchial dilating effect, this helps to treat allergies, asthma and hay fever
Maceration	Soaking, Softening of tissues after death from sterile autodigestion by enzymes
Macro	Combining form meaning large or abnormal size or length
Macroparasites	Typically, the parasitic helminths and arthropods. In general, parasites which do not multiply within their definitive hosts but instead produce transmission stages (eggs and larvae) which pass into the external environment. Immune responses elicited against macroparasites generally depend on the number of parasites present in a given host and tends to be of a relatively transient nature. The key epidemiological measurement is generally the number of parasites per host. Such parasites are often found in a highly aggregated distribution
Macrophage	Immune system cell that scavenges bacterial and other foreign material in the blood and tissues, A type of white blood cell which engulfs particulate foreign-material, including living or dead bacteria <BR>
Macula	Stain, spot, or thickening
Macular Degeneration	Pigmentary disturbance in the macula lutea lying slightly lateral to the center of the retina in the eye, which brings the loss of central visual acuity
Macule	Small, flat spot
Maculopapular	Small spot-related
Magnesium	Essential mineral. Chief function of magnesium is to activate certain enzymes, especially those related to carbohydrate metabolism. Also to maintain the electrical potential across nerve and muscle membranes. Essential for proper heartbeat and nerve transmission. Magnesium controls many cellular functions. Involved in protein formation, DNA production and function and in the storage and release of energy in ATP. Magnesium is closely related to calcium and phosphorus in body function. The average adult body contains approximately one ounce of magnesium. It is the fifth mineral in abundance within the body--behind calcium, phosphorus, potassium and sodium. Although about 70 % of the body's magnesium is contained in the teeth and bones, its most important functions are carried out by the remainder which is present in the cells of the soft tissues and in the fluid surrounding those cells <BR>
Magnesium Sulfates	Classified as minerals. Minerals are grouped into 2 types: macrominerals are found in fairly large amounts in the body; microminerals are found in smaller amounts (less than .005 percent of our body weight). Along with three microminerals (cobalt, molybdenum, and selenium), macrominerals of specific importance are calcium, chlorine, magnesium, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and sulfur. Magnesium occurs in both animal and plant tissue. It is essential as an enzyme activator, and is involved in the formation and maintenance of body protein
Magnetic Resonance Imaging	See MRI Scan
Maitake Mushroom	Grifron--Called King of Mushroom. Has the ability to lower blood pressure, which is beneficial to diabetics obesity patients. Researchers believe that Maitake has anti-tumor effects against syngeneic tumors, helping to prevent the destruction of T-helper cells by HIV
Malabsorption	Poor digestion. Condition in which the intestine has a less than normal ability to digest or absorb foodstuffs, which reduces the nutrients a person receives. Unabsorbed food may cause gas and diarrhea
Malacia	Abnormal sofening of a organ or structure (tissue)
Malaise	Vague illness, A generalized feeling of discomfort, uneasiness, illness, or lack of well-being that is often associated with a disease state
Malignant	Cancerous; can spread to other parts of the body
Malignant Fever	Fever causing severe deterioration or death
Manganese	Essential mineral found in trace amounts in tissues of the body. Adults normally contain an average of 10 to 20 milligrams of manganese in their bodies, most of which is contained in bone, the liver and the kidneys. Essential to several critical enzymes necessary for bone and blood formation, nerve function and protein metabolism. It is involved in the metabolism of fats and glucose and in the production of cholesterol. Also involved in the building and degrading of proteins and nucleic acid, biogenic amine metabolism, which involves the transmitting of nerve impulses and Manganese is also necessary for RNA chain initiation. An antioxidant nutrient which is important in the blood breakdown of amino acids and the production of energy. Necessary for the metabolism of Vitamin B-1 &amp; Vitamin E. A deficiency of manganese may result in ataxia, convulsions, digestive problems, dizziness, hearing loss, paralysis, and blindness &amp; deafness in infants <BR>
Manifest	Visible
Manifestation	Sign
MAO	Maximum Acid Output
Marshmallow	Quiets a cough and soothes sore throats, cuts, Boosts the immune system
Mass Action Transmission	Transmission of infection which occurs at a rate directly proportional to the number or density of both susceptibles and infecteds present
Massive	Solid
Mastocyte	Connective tissue cell
Mastocytosis	Group of rare diseases characterized by infiltrates of mast cells in the tissues and sometimes other organs
Mastodynia	Breast pain
Match	The compatibility between donor and recipient. In general, the more closely the recipient and donor match, the greater the potential for a successful transplant
Maternal Immunity	Immunity for a neonate provided by IgG antibody generated by a mother and passed across the placenta to the unborn offspring. This provides short lived protection (with a typical half life of 3-6 months) to the neonate. Also known as immunity <BR>
Matrix	Intracellular substance of a tissue or the tissue from which a structure develops
Matrix Protein	A structural protein of a virus particle which underlies the envelope and links it to the core
Maturation	Process of reaching full development or growth. The stage of viral replication at which a virus particle becomes infectious
MB	Microbiological Assay, Methylene Blue
McBurney's Point	An anatomical landmark in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen over the usual site of the appendix
MCFA	Medium Chain Fatty Acid
MCG	Microgram- a metric unit of measurement, l/1,000,000 of a gram
MCH	Mean Cell Hemoglobin
MCHC	Mean Cell Hemoglobin Concentration
mCi	Millicurie
MCT	Medium Chain Triglyceride
MCV	Mean Corpuscular Volume, average volume of erythrocytes
Meadowsweet	Lowers body temperature. Analgesic (pain-relieving) effect. Remedy for gastritis, heartburn, peptic ulcers and urinary tract infections. Relieve headaches. The Food and Drug Administration lists meadowsweet as an herb of undefined safety. European studies suggest the herb may stimulate uterine contractions. In addition, salicin has been associated with an increased risk of birth defects. Children under the age of 16 suffering from colds, chicken pox, or flu should not take Meadowsweet because of aspirin's association with Reye's Syndrome, a rare but potentially fatal condition. Although Meadowsweet itself has never been linked to Reye's syndrome, it's main healing ingredient is the same as aspirin's, so the possibility for an increased risk exists
Medial	Towards the midline of the body
Median	Average
Mediate	Indirect
Medical Evaluation	A medical assessment of a patient’s condition
Medicinal	Substance used for treating disease
Medicine	Art and science of preventing, diagnosing, and treating disease, and the maintenance of health
Medium Chain Triglycerides	One of the most concentrated sources of energy that the body uses. Because it is such a great energy source, Medium Chain Triglycerides can be used in place of carbohydrates in the diets of those who wish to restrict their intake of carbohydrates
Meds	Short for medications, or drugs
Medullary	Marrow-related
Megacolon	Colon enlargement
Megaloblastic	Large abnormal red blood cell
Megavitamin	Vitamin dosage that exceeds the amount needed for normal maintenance of life. Megavitamin dosages may be toxic and/or dangerous
Melanosis	Conditioned characterized by dark pigment deposits on the skin. Disorder of pigment metabolism
Melatonin	The only hormone secreted into the bloodstream by the Pineal gland. The hormone appears to inhibit numerous endocrine functions, including the gonadotropic hormones. Research exists on the efficacy of melatonin in treating jet lag and certain sleep disorders. Dosages greater than l milligram have been associated with drowsiness, headaches, disturbances in sleep/wake cycles and is contraindicated in those who are on antidepressive medication. It also negatively influences insulin utilization. Scientific studies indicate that Melatonin slows the aging process by fighting free-radical damage and rejuvenating the immune system. Melatonin also shows great promise as a treatment for many other diseases and conditions, such as: AIDS, Arthritis, Alzheimer's Disease, High Cholesterol, and Hypertension <BR>
Melena	Dark, blood-stained stools or vomit. When a person is bleeding from an ulcer, consisting of black tarry stools indicative of upper GI bleeds
Memory Cells	Produced from B cell lymphocytes, they recognize previously encountered antigens, long term
Menkes' Disease	A disorder of copper metabolism that is inherited as a recessive X-linked trait and is characterized by a deficiency of copper in the liver and of copper-containing proteins (as ceruloplasmin) which results in mental retardation, brittle kinky hair, and a fatal outcome early in life <BR>
Menorrhagia	Excessive uterine bleeding occurring at the regular intervals of menstruation, the period of flow being of greater than usual duration
Menses	Periodic discharge of blood, tissue fluid, mucous and epithelial cells, that usually lasts for 5 days; caused by the sudden reduction in hormone levels Also called menstrual cycle
Meperedine	Chemical name for the narcotic painkiller Demerol
mEq	Milliequivalent
MES	Mucosal Electrosensitivty
Mesenteric	Involving the skin attaching various organs to the body
Metabolic Acidosis	A metabolic derangement of acid-base balance where the blood pH is abnormally low. Causes include cardiogenic shock, hemorrhagic shock, sepsis, severe dehydration, toxic ingestion (e.g. isopropyl alcohol, methanol), alcoholic ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis, renal failure, and diabetic ketoacidosis. Respiratory acidosis will occur if the lungs are not ventilating properly
Metabolism	Sum of all the chemical and physical changes that take place within the body and enable its continued growth and functioning. Chemical process taking place in living tissues, necessary for the maintenance of the living organism, the sum of the processes in the buildup and destruction of protoplasm; the chemical changes in living cells by which energy is provided for vital processes and activities and new material is assimilated
Metabolism, Basal|Basal Metabolism	Turnover of energy in a fasting and resting organism using energy solely to maintain vital cellular activity, respiration, and circulation as measured by the basal metabolic rate <BR>
Metabolite	Substance produced by metabolism. Products of chemical reactions within body cells
Metabolization	Processing
Metamyelocyte	An intermediate stage in the development of a mature white blood cell
Metaplasia	Abnormal tissue change
Metastasis	Disease site transfer, The spread of cancer from one part of the body to another. Cells in the metastatic (second) tumor are like those in the original (primary) tumor
Metastatic	Spread from a primary site of disease to distant parts of the body
Meteorism	Abdominal gas
Methionine	Essential amino acid. Dietary source of sulfur and methyl groups. Important for growth, healthy nails and skin and the synthesis of taurine, cysteine, phosphatidylcholine (lecithin), bile, carnitine and endorphins. Antioxidant nutrient and lipotropic agent which promotes the physiological utilization of fat. Methionine is a principle supplier of sulfur which prevents disorders of the hair, skin and nails; helps lower cholesterol levels by increasing the liver's production of lecithin; reduces liver fat and protects the kidneys; is a natural chelating agent for heavy metals; regulates the formation of ammonia and creates ammonia-free urine which reduces bladder irritation, influences hair follicles &amp; promotes hair growth <BR>
Metrorrhagia	Breakthrough bleeding
mg	Milligrams. There are 1,000 milligrams in a gram
Mg	Magnesium <BR>
MI	Myocardial Infarction
MIC	Minimum Inhibitory Concentration
Micro	Combining form meaning small or minute
Microcirculation	Blood flow in fine vessels
Microemulsion	A suspension or mixture of tiny droplets of one liquid in a second liquid, such as the smooth mixture that is formed when Neoral® (cyclosporine capsules and oral solution for microemulsion) combines with fluids in the digestive system
Microgram	Millionth of a gram
Micrography	Microscope examination
Micron	Unit of length in the metric system equal to one-thousandth of a millimeter
Microparasites	Typically, viruses, bacteria, fungi and protozoa. More generally, parasites which multiply within their definitive hosts. Microparasites are characterized by small size, short generation times, and a tendency to induce immunity to reinfection in those hosts that survive. The duration of infection is usually short in relation to the lifespan of the host, but there are important exceptions, such as the slow viruses
Microsomes|Liver	In the hepatocyte, any of the vesicular fragments of endoplasmic reticulum formed after disruption and centrifugation of cells
Microvillus	Bump on a cell
Micturition	Urination
Milk of Calcium Bile	Limy Bile
Milk Thistle	Silybum Marianum. Also called Marian, St. Mary's, and Our Lady's Thistle. Named Silybum for its large purple thistle-like flower heads. Both the plant structures and seeds have been used to positively influence liver function and as a general tonic. Numerous studies have proven that this plant with its active Silymarin constituent has tremendous therapeutic application. Silymarin and component silybin function as antioxidants, protecting cell membranes from free-radical-mediated oxidative damage. This type of damage is known as lipid peroxidation. Most liver toxins produce their damaging effects by free radical mechanisms. Both silymarin and silybin protect red blood cell membranes against lipid peroxidation and hemolysis (breaking down of the red blood cells) caused by certain red blood cell poisons <BR>
Milligrams--Mg	There are 1,000 milligrams in 1 gram. Mg is the abbreviation
Milliliter-mL	One thousandths of a liter. Same liquid volume as a cubic centimeter (cc)
min	Minute
Mineral(s)|Mineral	Plays a vital role in regulating many body functions. Minerals are constituents of the bones, teeth, soft tissue, muscle, blood, and nerve cells. They are vital to overall mental and physical well-being. Regulate electrolyte balance and hormonal production, and they strengthen skeletal structures. Vitamins cannot be assimilated without the aid of minerals
Mint	Common species of mint include American Mint, Bergamot Mint, Corn Mint, Curled Mint, Horsemint, Mint, Peppermint, Round-Leaved Horsemint, Spearmint, Wild Mint, and Wild Water Mint
Miscible	Mixable
Mitochondria	Compartmentalized, double membrane, self-reproducing organelles present in the cytoplasm of almost all living cells
Mitochondria, Liver|Liver Mitochondria|Mitochondria	Mitochondria in hepatocytes. In all mitochondria, there is an outer membrane and an inner membrane, creating two separate mitochondrial compartments: the internal matrix space and a much narrower intermembrane space. In the liver mitochondrion, an estimated 67% of the total mitochondrial proteins is located in the matrix <BR>
Mitochondrion	(pl. mitochondria) Structure inside a cell that is the location of the cell's energy production machinery
Mitosis	Nuclear division, when cells divide
mIU	Milli-International Unit
mL	Milliliter
mm	Millimeter
MM	Mucous Membranes, Muscularis Mucosa <BR>
mmol	Millimole
mo	Month <BR>
MO	Mineral Oil
mol wt	Molecular Weight
Molecular Epidemiology	The use of nucleotide sequence information to study the diversity and distribution of virus populations
Molecule	Smallest fundamental unit of a substance which can exist in a free state and still retain the chemical properties of the substance. A molecule consists of a combination of atoms
Molybdenum	Essential mineral. Key component of at least three enzymes: xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase and sulfite oxidase. These enzymes are involved with carbohydrate metabolism, fat oxidation and urine metabolism. The average adult has about nine milligrams of molybdenum concentrated mostly in the liver, kidney, adrenal glands, bones and skin. Molybdenum deficiencies are associated with esophageal cancer, sexual impotency and tooth decay
Monocyte	Large mononuclear leukocyte
Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1	A chemokine that is a chemoattractant for human monocytes and may also cause cellular activation of specific functions related to host defense. It is produced by leukocytes of both monocyte and lymphocyte lineage and by fibroblasts during tissue injury
Monocytes	Monocytosis is seen in the recovery phase of many acute infections. It is also seen in diseases characterized by chronic granulomatous inflammation (TB, syphilis, brucellosis, Crohn's disease, and sarcoidosis), ulcerative colitis, systemic lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, polyarteritis nodosa, and many hematologic neoplasms. Poisoning by carbon disulfide, phosphorus, and tetrachloroethane, as well as administration of griseofulvin, haloperidol, and methsuximide, may cause monocytosis. Monocytopenia is generally not a clinical problem
Monogamous	Having one, long-term sexual partner
Monotherapy	One drug therapy, Therapy with one drug or agent
Monovalent	Specific for one antigen
Montmorillonite Clay	Often included in herbal formulations that deal with respiratory support. Highly adsorbent (not absorbent). By quickly neutralizing allergens before these foreign invaders can attach themselves to blood cells, adsorptive surfaces prevent allergic reactions
MOPP	Mechlorethamine, Vincristine, Procarbazine, Prednisone
Morbidity	Diseased state, State of ill-health produced by a disease
Mormon Tea	Ephedra Trifurca--Decongestant for hayfever sufferers. Decreases appetite, Elevates mood, Helps body dispose of excess fluid by increasing amount of urine produced, Increases blood pressure, Increases heart rate, Stimulates central nervous system, Stimulates energy, Treats fatigue. Don't take if you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or plan pregnancy in the near future or if you are breastfeeding or have diabetes mellitus
Morphew	Gelatinous substance that swells in water without dissolving and forms a slimy mass; used as an adhesive or demulcent
Morphology of Blood Cells	Microscopic characteristics
Mortality Rate	The per capita death rate in a population. The mortality rate is the reciprocal of the population life expectancy
mOsm	Milliosmole
Moss Spores	Also called American Ground Pine--Has properties much like that of the European Ground Pine. A powerful diuretic, promoting urine and removing obstructions of the spleen and liver. A valuable remedy in jaundice, rheumatism and most of chronic diseases. A decoction of this plant, combined with Dandelion and Agrimony, is highly recommended for liver complaints and obstructions
Mother of Thyme	Used for respiratory problems, helps to clear mucous congestion from the respiratory passages and lungs . A good tonic for the stomach and nerves, used for gastrointestinal problems such as mild gastritis, enteritis, painful menstruation and stomach cramps. Antispasmodic, Carminative, Expectorant, Rubefacient, Tonic. As bath additive made from the decoction it stimulates the flow of blood toward the surface of the body and relieves nervous exhaustion. An infusion of leaves is said to relieve the headache of a hangover. Said to be useful in breaking the alcoholic habit by causing diarrhea, hunger, sweating, thirst, and vomiting, along with a revulsion for alcohol. Also recommended for anemia, chlorosis, and insomnia. Used externally, alcoholic extracts are helpful for bruises, rheumatism stab wounds, and tumors
Motherwort	Cardiac tonic, been shown to be hypotensive, sedative, and antispasmodic. Calms palpitations and normalizes heart function in general
Motility	Ability to move; all movements of the intestines
Motor	Pertaining to movement
MRC	Medical Research Council (units)
MRI Scan	Test that uses a magnet linked to a computer to create pictures of areas inside the body. Also called magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA-messenger RNA	All cells store their permanent genetic information in DNA, due to the inherent stability of the DNA molecule. RNA is used to transmit this information to the rest of the cell . DNA information is copied into RNA, which can be read out by the cell's ribsomes. This RNA is then dissoved into its component molecules and reused in the creation of new RNA. These temporary RNA copies of DNA information are known as messenger RNA (mRNA). Messenger RNA, translated on ribosomes to produce proteins
Mucilages	Kind of dietary fiber. Similar to plant gums, mucilages are water soluble, sticky substances that are found in plants, especially seeds
Mucilaginous	Resembling a mucilage; slimy, sticky
Mucopolysaccharide	Carbohydrates that act as support structures in connective tissue in the body
Mucosa	Membrane consisting of mucus-producing cells, typically found lining the body orifices, stomach and bowel
Mucous Membrane	The membrane lining those cavities and canals communicating with the air. It is kept moist by the secretions of various types of glands
Muirapauma Root	Ptychopetalum Olacoides. Helps with gastrointestinal and
Mullein	Effective as a cough suppressant, sore throat soother, hemorrhoidal pain and wound healer. Anyone with a history of cancer should not take Mullein internally
Multicelluar	Composed of numerous cells
Multiple Infection	An infection in which an individual is infected by parasites of more than one species
Muscle Wasting	Loss of muscle bulk because of disuse or pathological process
Musculature	Muscles
Mustard Seed	Sinapis Alba. Enhances the stimulation process, supports weight loss
Mutagenic	Causing genetic mutation, Causing alterations in genetic material
Mutate	When cells divide or viruses multiply, their genetic material must be copied. Sometimes mistakes are made when this happens and the resulting new cell or virus is different in some way. This is important for viruses because mutation can fool the immune system into not recognizing the virus
Mutation	Process in which a gene undergoes a permanent, heritable structural change. A relatively permanent change in hereditary material involving either a physical change in chromosome relations or a biochemical change in the codons that make up genes; also: the process of producin a mutation. An individual, trait or strain, resulting from mutation
Mutation, Gene|Gene Mutation|Mutation	Point Mutation
Mutation, Point|Mutation|Point Mutation	Also called Gene Mutation, mutation due to reorganization within a gene (as by addition, deletion or substitution, of a nucleotide)
Mutation, Somatic|Mutation|Somatic Mutation	Mutation occurring in a somatic cell
Mutual Support/Help Group|Mutual Help Group|Mutual Support Group	Group of people having the same problem(s) who meet on a regular basis to share information, fears, experiences, tips on coping, provide each other with emotional support
Myalgia	Muscle pain
Myasthenia	Muscle weakness
Mycobacterium	Bacteria
Myelin	Substance made of protein and lipid (fat) that protects the nerves, especially in the brain
Myelofibrosis	An anemic condition in which bone marrow becomes fibrotic and the liver and spleen usually exhibit a development of blood cell precursors
Myelosuppression	Stopping bone marrow activity
Myelotoxic	Destructive to bone marrow
Myoma	Benign tumor made up of muscular elements
Myositis	Muscle inflammation
Myrrh Gum	Normalizes mucous membrane activity. Used for digestion, infection, and vaginitis. Good mouthwash and gargle for sores in the mouth & throat, asthma, coughs, sore teeth & gums, and other chest problems. Can be taken internally for bad breath, loose teeth, and weak gums
Myxedema	Condition characterized by dry, waxy swelling of the skin with abnormal deposits of glycosaminoglycans in the skin (mucinosis) and other tissues, and associated with primary hypothyroidism
Myxoma	Benign tumor composed of primitive connective tissue cells and stroma
N	Nitrogen; normal (strength of solution)
N&V	Nausea & Vomiting
Na	Sodium
NABX	Needle Aspiration Biopsy
NAC	(n-acetyl-l-cysteine) A sulfur compound that is a precursor of glutathione
NaCl	Sodium Chloride
Nadir	Low point
NANB	Non-A Non-B Hepatitis (Now called Hepatitis C)
Nanometer	One billionth of a meter, approximately 250 millionths of an inch
Narcotic	Drug that, in moderate doses, allays sensibility, relieves pain, and produces sleep, if misused or taken in large doses, is poisonous to the system
Nasogastric Tube	A plastic tube with a number of openings at the lower end, passed through the nose into the stomach for the purpose of decompressing gas and draining accumulated liquids
Nasse's Law	Statement of the pattern of X-linked recessive inheritance
Natriuresis	Excretion of sodium by kidneys
Naturopathic Doctor|ND	ND-- A physician trained in natural healing meth-ods. Naturopathic doctors receive a four-year postgraduate training at an accredited college or university, and function as primary care providers
Nausea	Feeling sick, the urge to vomit
NBC	Nasobiliary Catheter
NE	Needle Electrode
NEC	Necrotizing Enterocolitis
Necr- Necro|Necr|Necro	A combination form meaning &quotpertaining to death"
Necrolysis	Gangrene
Necrosis	One of the two mechanisms by which cell death occurs (the other being the physiological process of apoptosis. Necrosis is caused by the progressive degradative action of enzymes and is generally associated with severe cellular trauma. It is characterized by mitochondrial swelling, nuclear flocculation, and uncontrolled cell lysis. Decay or death of one or more cells, resulting from irreversible damage. Death of living tissue; death of a portion of tissue differentially affected by local injury (as loss of blood supply,burning, corrosion, or the local lesion of a disease) <BR>
Necrosis, Fat|Fat Necrosis|Necrosis	A condition in which the neutral fats in the cells of adipose tissue are split into fatty acids and glycerol <BR>
Necrosis, Tumor Factor|Necrosis|Necrosis Tumor Factor|Tumor Factor Necrosis	TNF. A protein that is produced by monocytes and macrophages in response especially to endotoxins and that activates leukocytes and has antitumor activity
Needle Disposal Container	Puncture proof container with a lid, specifically designed to hold used syringes and needles until that can be disposed of properly
Needlestick	Puncture of the skin while handling hypodermic needles
NEFA	Nonesterified Fatty Acids
Neonate	A baby up to one month old
Neoplastic	Tumor related
Nephritis	Kidney inflammation
Nephrolith	Kidney stone
Nephrologist	Physician who studies the kidney and treats kidney disease
Nephropathy	Kidney disease
Nephrotic	Kidney related disorder
Nephrotoxic	Destructive to the kidneys
Nervine	Substance that soothes nervous excitement
Nervous System	System in the body that is comprised of the brain, spinal cord, nerves, ganglia and parts of the receptor organs that receive and interpret stimuli and transmit impulses to effector organ
Nest	An isolated collection or clump of cells in tissue of a different structure such as a nest of sarcomatous cells in the liver
Nettle	Urtica Dioica--Diuretic properties. Used for the treatment of urinary retention brought on by benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH). Adverse effects from consuming nettle tea can range from upset stomach to burning sensations in the skin, difficulty in urination and bloating
Neural	Nerve related
Neuralgia	Severe recurrent pain along one or more nerves, usually not associated with changes in the nerve structure
Neuritis	Nerve inflammation
Neurodermatitis	Skin damage caused by scratching
Neurogenic	Originating from damage to the supplying nerves
Neuroleptanalgesia	Altered awarenss of pain due to drugs
Neuromuscular	Muscle and nerve related
Neurotoxic	Destructive to nerve tissue
Neurotransmitter	Chemical released by nerve endings
Neutralization	Blocking of virus infection by antibodies; also, an assay which measures this
Neutropenia	Low white blood cell count
Neutrophils	The larger and physiologically most numerous class of infection-fighting white blood cells, characteristically even more numerous in generalized bacterial infections <BR>
Neutrophils, Segmented|Neutrophils|Segmented Neutrophils	Neutrophils are the larger and physiologically most numerous class of infection-fighting white blood cells, characteristically even more numerous in generalized bacterial infections; segmentation signifies cell division, so a high segmented neutrophil count implies vigorous response
NG Tube	Abbreviation for a nasogastric tube
ng	Nanogram (=millimicrogram)
NG	Nasogastric
Niacin	Nicotinic Acid. A B vitamin essential for energy production in cells. The recommended daily allowance is about 14 mg for adult females and about 18 mg for adult males. Improves circulation and reduces the cholesterol level in the blood, maintains the nervous system, helps metabolize protein, sugar & fat, reduces high blood pressure, increases energy through proper utilization of food, prevents pellagra, and helps maintain a healthy skin, tongue & digestive system. A deficiency of niacin may result in bad breath, canker sores, headaches, fatigue, gastrointestinal disturbance, insomnia, irritability, loss of appetite, mental depression, muscular weakness, nervousness, pellagra, skin disorders, indigestion, and vague aches & pains
Niacinamide	B3--See Niacin
Niemann-Pick Disease	An error in lipid metabolism that is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, is characterized by accumulation of phospholipid in macrophages of the liver, spleen, lymph glands, and bone marrow, and leads to gastrointestinal disturbances, malnutrition, enlargement of the spleen, liver, and lymph nodes, and abnormalities of the blood-forming organs <BR>
NIH	National Institutes of Health--The primary biomedical research facility/institution of the federal government and in the world
Nil	None
Nitrogen	Colorless, odorless, gaseous element forming about 47 % of the earth¹s atmosphere. In the combined form the element is a constituent of all proteins
Nitrogen Excretion	Removal of excess nitrogen from the cell
Nitrosamine	Chemical that may be formed from the metabolism of nitrates which are common preservatives used in processed foods
NJ	Nasojejunal
NK	Natural killer cell, a type of immune cell
nm	Nanometer (=millimicron)
NOB	Neutralization Of Binding
Nocturnal Pain	Pain that occurs during the night
Node	Protuberance or Swelling. Knot
Nodule	Small node, as of body tissue. Small knob like outgrowth, (such as a tumorous growth or a calcification near an arthritic joint). A small mass of rounded or irregular shape. The nodulus of the cerebellum
Non-A non-B Hepatitis	The old term for hepatitis shown not to be caused by the AB viruses. In 1988, this form of hepatitis was shown to be mainly caused by HCV
Non-direct Transmission	A mode of transmission that differs in some mysterious way from indirect transmission
Non-Essential	Can be manufactured by the body with proper nutrition
Non-Secretor	A person who does not secrete their blood type antigen into their secretions. About 15% of the population are non secretors. Several correlations to disease (including rheumatic heart disease and alcoholism) have been linked to non-secretor status <BR>
Non Specific Resistance	Resistance to infection and the invasion of foreign matter through generalised measures; such as the barrier provided by skin and mucosa
Noncompliance	Failure to follow the instructions of one's health care providers, such as not taking medicine as prescribed or not showing up for clinic visits. (a person can be denied a transplant on these grounds)
Noninvasive	Term used to describe procedures that do not require any injection into or surgical penetration of the body
Nonlinear	Not linear
Nonresponder	Patients who do not respond positively to therapy
Norepinephrine	A chemical transmitter, naturally occurring in nerves, and used in synthetic form to sustain blood pressure
Normal Saline	Salt solution at the same concentration as in the body fluids
Normotensive	With normal blood pressure
Nosocomial	Disease contracted in hospital
Nosocomial Infection	New disorder not relating to pre-existing condition acquired during a patients treatment while in the hospital. i.e. Patient who receives a blood transfusion and is infected with hepatitis
Notifiable Disease	Diseases, usually of an infectious nature, whose occurrence is required by law to be made known to a health officer or local government authority
Novel Liver-Specific Transport Protein	Liver protein located on the sinusoidal domain of the plasma membrane
NPO	Abbreviation for nothing by mouth (from the Latin Nil peros)
NS	Abbreviation for normal saline solution
NSAID	Non Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; ibuprofen and naproxen which are used in the treatment of pain
Nuclear Atypia	Pathological variation in the histological appearance of the central portion of body cells
Nuclear Membrane	Ordered membrane interface regulating the exchange of material between the nucleus and cytoplasm of the cell
Nucleic Acid	Chemical compounds of the utmost biologic importance, contained in all living organisms in the form of RNA and DNA; consists mainly of sugar moiety, phosphoric acids and nitrogenous bases
Nucleocapsid Protein, Hepatitis Virus|Hepatitis Virus Nucleocapsid Protein|Nucleocapsid Protein	Formerly SY to NM (viral N protein) till 1996; NM promoted to HM
Nucleocapsids	Core of a virus, including the protein coat and the genetic material contained inside, core of a virus particle consisting of the genome plus a complex of proteins
Nucleoside	A compound (as adenosine or guanosine) that consists of a purine or pyrimidine base combined with deoxyribose or ribose and is found especially in DNA or RNA
Nucleotide	One of the compounds into which nucleic acid splits on hydrolysis, consisting of a nitrogenous base, a sugar, and a phosphate group. Joined to a purine or pyrimidine base and to a phosphate group and that are the basic structural units of RNA and DNA
Nucleus	Generally oval protoplasmic body in the center of the cell which contains the genetic material and is surrounded by a nuclear membrane; an essential organelle that controls growth, metabolism, and reproduction
Nummular	Coin-like
Nutmeg Liver	A liver appearing mottled like a nutmeg when cut because of congestion and associated with impaired circulation especially from heart or lung disease
Nutraceutical	Foods or food-derived substances in extracted form that have proven medicinal and health benefits
NV	Nausea, Vomiting
NVD	Nausea, Vomiting & Diarrhea
NX	Unknown degree of lymph node involvement in a malignant process
O	Obese
O Neg	Type O, Rhesus negative blood; also called universal donor blood since any human can receive O negative blood without complication
Oat	Also called Wild Oat. Used mainly for its nutritional value and treating gastronenteritis and dyspepsia. Oat extract and tincture are useful as nerve and uterine tonics. A tea made from oat straw has been recommended for chest problems. Has been used effectively as an antispasmodic, nervine, and stimulant
Observer Variation	Failure by the observer to measure or identify a phenomenon accurately, which results in an error. Sources for this may be due to the observer's missing an abnormality, or to faulty technique resulting in incorrect test measurement, or to misinterpretation of the data. Two varieties are inter-observer variation (the amount observers vary from one another when reporting on the same material) and intra-observer variation (the amount one observer varies between observations when reporting more than once on the same material) <BR>
Obstipation	Severe constipation
Obstruction	Blockage or clogging of a duct,vessel, etc., prevents solids or liquids from flowing through the area and results in a buildup of pressure above the obstruction
Obtund	To render a sensation less acute, to reduce the level of alertness
Occlusion	Closing, act of closure or state of being closed; an obstruction or a closing off
Occult	Concealed
Occult Bleeding	Hidden bleeding. Bleeding that is not visible on gross inspection
OCG	Oral Cholecystogram
Octacosanol	The active ingredient in wheat germ oil. Used to increase endurance, stamina & vigor
Odds Ratio	A comparison of the presence of a risk factor for disease in a sample of diseased subjects and non diseased controls. The number of people with disease who were exposed to a risk factor (Ie) over those with disease who were not exposed (Io) divided by those without disease who were exposed (Ne) over those without who were not exposed (No). Thus OR=(Ie/Io)/(Ne/No)= Ie No / Io Ne. This measure should be used for case control studies where we retrospectively look at risks in those with and without disease. Also known as exposure odds ratio
OI	Opportunistic Infection
Olfactory	Pertaining to the sense of smell
Oligoelement	Trace element
Oliguria	Abnormally small urine output
Olive	Olive oil is useful externally for bruises, burns, insect bites, sprains, and intense itching (pruritus). Olive oil taken internally increases the secretion of bile and acts as a laxative by encouraging muscular contraction in the bowels. It is also soothing to mucous membranes. The leaves are used as an antiseptic, astringent, febrifuge, and tranquilizer
Omega-3 Fatty Acids	Constituents of fish oils that may protect against heart attacks by thinning the blood. Also acts as anti-inflammatory agent. Because of its effect on blood clotting, you should avoid fish oil supplements if you are taking any type of anti-coagulant drug
Oncologist	Doctor who specializes in treating cancer
Oncolytic	Cancer treatment related
Oncotic	Swelling related
Opalescent	Opal like
Open-Label Study/Trial|Open-Label Study|Open-Label Trial	The opposite of a double-blind trial. In open label trials, the effectiveness of a treatment is determined with full knowledge of whether or not the patient is taking the medication. Because the expectations of the investigator and patient can subtlely influence the results of such trials, they are considered less useful than double blind trials
Opisthorchiasis	Infection of the biliary tract by the liver flukes Opisthorchis felineus and O. viverrini. When seen in heavy infections, local injury to the distal bile capillaries and surrounding liver tissue develops; in severe infections, there may be cirrhosis of the liver with areas of necrosis and fatty degeneration
Opisthorchis	The type genus of the family Opisthorchiidae including several trematodes that are casual or incidental parasites of the human liver
Opisthotonos	Spasm
OPO	Organ Procurement Organization
Opportunistic	Disease usually excluded by body defenses
Oral Antibiotics	Medications administered as a capsule, pill, tablet, or liquid in the treatment of a bacterial infection
Oral Cholecystogram	Gallbladder x-ray. The procedure is designed to test the function of the gallbladder and to detect gallstones. X-rays are taken of the gallbladder after a patient swallows a contrast agent such as a barium meal
Orally	By Mouth
Oregon Grape Root	Has a proven strong bacteriacidal effect. Used for treating the mucous membranes, especially in cases of uterine and vaginal infections. Has been shown effective against escherichia coli, staph, strep, and tuberculosis as well as curing a water borne disease called giardiasis
Organ Mountain Crape	Mainly used in the treatment of chronic and scaly skin conditions such as eczema and psoriasis. Also used effectively in stomach and gallbladder conditions, especially when associated with nausea and vomiting. As a laxative, it may be safely used in chronic constipation
Organ Preservation	Between organ procurement and transplant, organs require special methods of preservation to keep them viable. The length of time that organs and tissues can be kept outside the body varies, depending on the organ, the preservation fluid and the temperature
Organ Procurement Organization|OPO	OPO's serve as the integral link between the potential donor and recipient and are accountable for the retrieval, preservation and transportation of organs for transplantation. All OPOs are UNOS members
Organ Rejection	An attempt by the immune system to reject or destroy what it recognizes to be a foreign presence (i.e., a transplanted liver)
Organelles	Specialized cytoplasmic structure of a cell performing a specific function
Organism	Any living entity
Orientation	Awareness of your environment
Ornithine	Nonessential amino acid but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. Manufactured from arginine and functions similarly to arginine, it stimulates the human growth hormone and is made by the digestion of proteins and some compounds made from arginine. The major difference between the two is that ornithine enters cell mitochondria. Arginine does not
Orthohepadnavirus	Genus of Hepadnaviridae causing hepatitis in humans, woodchucks, and ground squirrels. It is also associated with human hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatitis B Virus is the type species
Osha	Ligusticum Porteri. Said to be an immune builder, helps the body stave off viral infections. Originally used to treat bronchial infections, colds and flu
Osmotic Fragility	Susceptibility, or lack of resistance, of erythrocytes to hemolysis when exposed to increasingly hypotonic saline solutions
Osteitis	Inflammation of the bone
Osteochondritis	Inflammation of both bone and cartilage
Osteolysis	Bone dissolving
Osteomalacia	Bone softening
Osteomyelitis	Bone inflammation
Ostomy	General term pertaining to any operation in which an artificial opening is formed. Usually refers to an opening in the abdomen for the discharge of urine or stool
Oswego Tea	Also called Bee Balm, Blue Balm, High Balm, Low Balm, Monarda, Mountain Balm, and Mountain Mint. Used mainly as a stomach remedy, to relieve flatulence, nausea, and vomiting. Also used effectively as a carminative, rubefacient, and stimulant
OTC	Over The Counter
OURQ	Outer Upper Right Quandrant
Overdispersion	See Aggregation
Oxamic Acid	Amino-substituted glyoxylic acid derivative
Oxidant	Compound that donate electrons to other compounds
Oxidation	Adding oxygen, chemical reaction in which electrons from one reactant (reducing agent) are transferred to the other reactant (oxidizing agent); the atoms in the element in the losing electrons increase their valence correspondingly
Oxidative Phosphorylation	Synthesis of ATP through various reactions whereby energy for the cell is obtained
Oxymel	Preparation containing honey, water, and vinegar, used as an expectorant, usually five parts honey, one part water, and one part vinegar
oz	Ounce
P	Phosphorus; Pressure
PABA	Para Aminobenzoic Acid. May be considered part of the Vitamin B complex. As a coenzyme, PABA functions in the breakdown and utilization of proteins and in the formation of red blood cells, aids healthy bacteria in producing folic acid; contains sun screening properties; aids in the assimilation of Pantothenic acid; and returns hair to its natural color. A deficiency of Para Amino Benzoic Acid may cause constipation, depression, digestive disorders, eczema, extreme fatigue, headaches, irritability, nervousness, and/or premature graying of the hair
PaCO2	Arterial carbon dioxide pressure
PAF	Platelet Activating Factor
Pain Behavior	Observable actions other than descriptive speech arising out of the experience of pain
Palliative	Giving relief but not cure
Palmar Erythema	Red Palms. Red palms are seen in people with advanced liver disease, due to expansion of small blood vessels (capillaries)
Palp	Refers to blood pressure taken under emergency conditions when listening for the systolic and diastolic pressures with a stethoscope is impossible. Taken by feeling (palpation) the pulse
Palpation	Act of feeling with the hand. Physical examination in medical diagnosis by pressure of the hand or fingers to the surface of the body , to determine the condition (as of size or consistency) of an underlying part or organ
Palpitation	Subjective sensation of unduly rapid or irregular heartbeat
Palsy	Paralysis
Pancreas	A large, elongated, racemose gland situated transversely behind the stomach, between the spleen and the duodenum
Pancreatitis	Inflammation of the pancreas
Pancytopenia	Low Red Blood Cell & low White Blood Count and low platelet count
Pandemic	An epidemic widely distributed in space
Pangamic Acid	Vitamin B-15. Exhibits antioxidant properties. Lowers blood cholesterol levels, Stimulates immune system response, Protect the liver from alcohol damage, cures fatigue, wards off hangovers, and assists in the regulation of hormones
Pantothenic Acid	B-complex vitamin necessary for the normal functioning of the adrenal gland, which directly affects growth. Essential for the formation of fatty acids. As a coenzyme, it participates in the utilization of riboflavin and in the release of energy from carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Improves the body's resistance to stress; helps the adrenal glands, and fights infections by building antibodies. A deficiency of Pantothenic Acid may result in burning feet, digestive disorders, dizzy spells, muscle cramps, restlessness, retarded growth, skin abnormalities, stomach stress, and vomiting
PAO	Peak Acid Output
PAO2	Alveolar oxygen pressure
PaO2	Arterial oxygen pressure <BR>
PAP	Pancreatitis Associated Protein
Papaya	Carica Papaya. Aids in the breakdown and metabolism of protein, exhibits anti-ulcer action, and helps relieve indigestion <BR>
Papilloma	Benign epithelial neoplasm
Papule	Mole
Para	Prefix meaning beside or near
Para-Aortic-Lymph nodes	Alongside the aorta, or major blood vessel carrying oxygen-rich blood to the body <BR>
Paracentesis	Fluid removal
Parasite	Organism that lives in or on another organism, usually causing damage to the host organism. Any disease causing organism. An organism exhibiting an obligatory dependence on another organism, its host, which is detrimental to the host
Parasitic	Parasite related
Parasiticide	Agent that kills parasites
Parathyroid	Thyroid related
Paravenous	Beside a vein
Parenchyma	Functional tissue of an organ
Parenchymal	Hepatocytes are parenchymal cells of the liver
Parenteral	Not by mouth, any substance that is introduced into the body anyway except by mouth. Not in or through the digestive system, introduced otherwise than by way of the intestines and occurring outside the intestine
Parenteral Transmission	Transmission of infection via the parenteral route; for example via contamination with infected blood or blood products
Paresis	Partial paralysis
Paresthesia	A perverted sensation of crawling, tingling or burning of the skin. Common in neuropathies
Parietal	Outer wall related
Parotitis	Swollen glands
Paroxysmal	In sudden attacks
Parsley	Petroselinum Sativum. Used as a carminative to relieve gas and stimulate digestive action, the root has been used for its mild diuretic activity, helping to increase urine output and rid the body of excess fluids. An excellent breath freshener
Passiflora	Edulis. Has a sedative and tranquilizing effect. Said to have an anti-spasmodic effect especially when associated tension <BR>
Passion Flower	Also called Maypop and Wild Passion Flower. Reduces spasms and depresses the central nervous system. Used as a sedative in nervous disorders, difficulties in sleeping, anxiety, restlessness, childbirth and menopause
Passive Immunity	Immunity which has been acquired through the transfer of maternal or other antibodies
Passive Immunization	An artificial and temporary conferring of immunity that does not actively involve the body's own immune system. The patient is given immunoglobulins, or antibodies, to a virus, rather than learning to create his or her own. Thus the antibodies are not reproduced, and begin to disappear from the body shortly after immunization.
Pastille	Medicated lozenge
Path Urine	Urinalysis
Pathogen	Disease producing organism. Any organism or substance capable of producing a disease. Same as Parasite
Pathogenicity	The degree to which a pathogen debilitates its host
Pathological	Disease study related
Pathologist	Doctor who identifies diseases by studying tissues and cells under a microscope, or who supervises diagnositic tests and conducts experiments or other investigations to determine the cause or nature of diseases
Patient Compliance	Correctly following all the directions given by the doctor or other healthcare providers during the course of therapy
Pau D'Arco	Tabebuia Avellanedae. Tea prepared from the bark of various species of Tabebuia, a classification of about 100 broad-leaved, mostly evergreen trees, native to the West Indies and Central and South America. Exhibits numerous anti-viral properties and has an antibacterial agent which has a positive overall healing effect. A powerful immune system builder, blood cleanser. Has been used effectively for a AIDS, all strains of infection, allergies, cancer, candidiasis, diabetes, leukemia, liver disease, rheumatism, smoker's cough, tumors, ulcers, and warts
PBX	Punch Biopsy
PCO2	Carbon dioxide pressure (or tension)
PCP	Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia--A type of pneumonia seen primarily in patients whose immune systems are suppressed
PCPS	Peroral Cholangiopancreatoscopy
PCR	Polymerase Chain Reaction--A process used to amplify pieces of the genetic make-up of a cell or virus. The amplified pieces are then detected and the presence of the virus itself can be determined. Scientific method of detecting the presence in the bloodstream of minute quantities of DNA and RNA. ie. the RNA fragments from Hepatitis C cells. 2. An in vitro technique for rapidly synthesizing large quantities of a given DNA segment that involves separating the DNA into its two complementary strands, binding a primer to each single strand at the end of the given DNA segment where synthesis will start, using DNA polymerase to synthesize <BR>two-stranded DNA from each single strand, and repeating the process <BR>
PCT	Porphyria Cutanea Tarda
PD	Potential Difference
PDGF	Platelet-Derived Growth Factor
PE	Pharyngoesophageal
Peak flow	Lung power
Pectins	Kind of dietary fiber. Chemicals related to carbohydrates and are found in fruits and vegetables. Pectins work by binding with bile acids, decreasing cholesterol and fat absorption. Effective in preventing and treating gallstones. There is also evidence that the regular use of Pectin may lessen the severity of diabetes
Pectoral	Agent used to treat diseases of the respiratory tract, Related to the chest
Peer Review	The process by which a medical article is evaluated by experts before it is published. Although this process is effective in preventing flawed studies from being published before the flaws are corrected, it can occasionally stifle new ideas. The best traditional medical journals have rigorous peer review processes to ensure that only the most carefully conducted studies are published
PEG	Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy
PEG Interferon	Interferon attached to molecule of Polyethylene Glycol; increased ½ life and renal clearance make it a long acting, weekly injection
Pegasys(TM)|Pegasys	Peginterferon alfa-2a. (adverse events with Pegasys were similar to those seen with traditional interferon regimens, such as fatigue, headache, myalgia/arthralgia, flu-like symptoms, nausea/vomiting, injection site reactions, fever, chills, diarrhea, partial alopecia, abdominal pain, depression, irritability, insomnia, dizziness and anorexia
Peliosis Hepatis	A condition in which microscopic pools of blood are present throughout the liver parenchyma, which may lead to congestion and necrosis. An abnormal condition characterized by the occurrence of numerous small blood-filled cystic lesions throughout the liver
Pellegra	Syndrome caused by a deficiency of niacin (or failure to convert tryptophan to niacin). Characterized by skin inflammation, inflammation of mucous membrmes, psychic disturbances and diarrhea
Penetration	The stage of viral replication at which the virus genome enters the cell
Pennyroyal	Mentha Pulegium. Used as a carminative to relieve gas, stimulate digestive action and to relieve nausea. A mild tea brewed from the leaves of this plant is often recommended to induce sweating to aid in eliminating toxins from the body
Pennywort	Centella Asiatica (L.) Urban. Also called Centella and Gotu Kola. See Gotu Kola
Peony	Paeonia Officinalis. Used for its antispasmodic, diuretic, and sedative properties. For treating epilepsy, gout, jaundice, bladder and kidney problems
Peppermint	Herb used for intestinal and nervous disorders. Used in teas, oil, tinctures. Can help relieve diarrhea, nasal congestion, soothe sore muscles and irritable bowel syndrome. Peppermint oil is highly concentrated and should be used only in the small amounts. Pure menthol is poisonous and should never be taken internally
Pepsin	Enzyme produced in the stomach that breaks down protein into simpler molecules
Peptic	Digestion related
Peptic Ulcer	Open sore on the lining of the esophagus, duodenum or stomach. An ulcer in the stomach is called a gastric ulcer, an ulcer in the duodenum, a duodenal ulcer
Peptides	Any member of a class of compounds of low molecular weight which yield two or more amino acids on hydrolysis. Formed by loss of water from the NH2 and COOH groups of adjacent amino acids, they are known as di-tri-, tetra- (etc.) peptides, depending on the number of amino acids in the molecule. Peptides form the constituent parts of proteins tri-, tetra- (etc.) peptides, depending on the number of amino acids in the molecule. Peptides form the constituent parts of proteins <BR><BR>
Per Capita Rate	A rate which is proportional to the number of individuals in a population
Peracute	Very acute and violent
Percutaneous	Through the skin, absorption or passage of substances into the body through unbroken skin. ie. absorbed through the skin or inhaled
Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography	Diagnostic test in which an x-ray is taken of the gallbladder and bile ducts after a needle has been passed through the skin, ribs, and liver so that dye can be injected into the liver's duct network
Perennial	Persistent
Perforated Ulcer	Ulcer that has extended through the full thickness of the wall of the stomach or the duodenum, allowing stomach juice to leak into the peritoneal cavity.
Perforation	Abnormal hole in the wall of a hollow organ
Perfuse	To cause to flow or spread, to force a fluid through an organ or tissue especially by way of the blood vessels. i.e., perfuse a liver with salt solution
Perfusion	Through passage of fluid
Peri	Prefix meaning around
Periarthritis	Joint inflammation
Perihepatitis	Inflammation of the peritoneal capsule of the liver
Perinatal	Between the 28th week of pregnancy and the end of the first week of life
Perinatal Hepatitis	Hepatitis infection which can be seen to have occurred at or around the time of birth
Perinatal Transmission	Transmission of an infectious disease from Mother to infant. This can take place in the uterus during or after birth
Perineal	Related to the area around the pelvic region
Perineum	Area between the thighs, extending from the anus to the external genitals
Perioperative	Immediate pre and post operative
Perioral	Mouth related
Peripheral Neuropathy	Functional disturbance of the nervous system outside the brain and spinal cord
Peristalsis	Progressive wavelike muscular contractions that move materials through the upper GI tract
Peritoneal Dialysis	Method of purifying the blood by flushing the abdominal cavity with a dilute salt solution
Peritoneum	Transparent covering of the organs that lies just behind the muscular wall of the abdomen. Lining of the abdominal cavity
Peritonitis	Inflammation of the transparent membrane that covers most of the abdomen beneath the muscle layer. Usually due to intestinal perforation
Perivascular	Around a vessel
Periwinkle	An excellent astringent that may be used either internally or externally. Its main use is in the treatment of excessive menstrual flow, either during the menstrual period itself, or with blood loss between periods
Pernicious	Fatal
Peroral	By mouth
Peroxidation	Type of oxidation that results in the formation of peroxides in body tissues which contain high proportions of oxygen
Persistant	Disease or medical condition that is continued or repeated
Persistant Infection	Infections in which ongoing virus replication occurs, but the virus adjusts its replication and pathogenicity so as to avoid killing host. They differ from chronic infections in that whereas in chronic infections, the virus is usually eventually cleared by the host (unless the infection proves fatal), in persistent infections, the virus may continue to be present and to replicate in the host for its entire lifetime
Petechia(e)|Petechia	Small, purplish red spot, caused by bleeding under the skin
pg	Picogram (=micromicrogram)
pH	Hydrogen ion concentration
PH	A numerical scale of 1-14 that measures the acidity-alkalinity of a substance. Normal arterial blood pH is approximately 7.4 <BR>
Phagocytic	Pertaining to phagocytes --scavenger cells that ingest bacteria
Phagocytosis	Destruction of bacteria. The engulfing of microorganisms, other cells, and foreign particles by phagocytic cells
Pharmacognosy	Science encompassing those phases of knowledge relating to natural products which are generally of medicinal value and primarily of plant origin. Natural product medicine
Pharmacokinetic	Action of drugs in the body
Pharmacological	Drug science related
Pharmacology	Used with drugs and exogenously administered chemical substances for their effects on living tissues and organisms. Includes acceleration and inhibition of physiological and biochemical processes and other pharmacologic mechanisms of action
Pharmacon	Drug
PHC	Primary Heptacellular Carcinoma
Phenotype	The sum total of visible primary traits which characterize the members of a group. The visible expression of genotype
Phenylalanine	Essential amino acid. Precursor to tyrosine which is used to manufacture certain hormones (dopa, dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine) which are important for the transmission of nerve impulses. As neurotransmitters, these substances are believed to influence mood, appetite control and memory. Also see DLPA
Phlebitis	Vein inflammation
Phlebography	Vein X-ray
Phlebotomy	The removal of blood from a vein for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes
Phosphatidyl Choline	Most significant component of Lecithin. Emulsifies and breaks down fat deposits in the body, which make it helpful in the prevention of gallstones, atherosclerosis, heart disease, and liver problems. Research has shown that Phosphatidyl Choline is beneficial in depression, memory loss and neurological disorders. It is 3 times more potent than Lecithin
Phosphoamino Acids	Amino acids that contain phosphorus as an integral part of the molecule
Phosphodiester Bond	Not a precise term. Refers to any molecule in which two parts are joined through a phosphate group. Examples are found in RNA, DNA, phospholipids, cyclic nucleotides, nucleotide diphosphates and triphosphates
Phospholipid	Also called Phosphatide. Fat or lipid containing phosphorus found in high quantities in the brain and very important to the function of cellular membranes and to the nervous system. Any of numerous lipids (as lecithins and sphingomyelin) in which phosphoric acid as well as a fatty acid is esterified to glycerol and which are found in all living cells and in the bilayers of plasma membranes
Phosphorolysis	A reversible reaction analogous to hydrolysis in which phosphoric acid functions in a manner similar to that of water with the formation of a phosphate (as glucose-1-phosphate in the breakdown of liver glycogen)
Phosphorus	Second most abundant mineral in the body found in every living cell. Involved in the proper functioning of both muscles and nerves. Needed for metabolic processes of all cells, to activate many other nutrients. The phosphorus content of the body is approximately one percent of total body weight. Phosphorus combines with fats to form phospholipids. It takes part in the production of energy for the body, and it is second only to calcium as a constituent of bones and teeth. Phosphorus is necessary for metabolic functions relating to the brain and the nerves, as well as for muscle action and enzyme formation.
Photodynamic Therapy	Treatment that destroys cancer cells with drugs and lasers that become active when exposed to light
Physiological	Normal
Phytochemical	Substances that occur naturally in plants and have been shown in research to possibly prevent or cure disease
Phytonutrient	Nutrient derived from a plant
Phytosterol	Sterol derived from plants
Pigmented Liver	One containing pigment, usually a result of malaria and melanemia, or the Dubin-Johnson syndrome
Pityriasis	Scaling of the skin
PL	Phospholipid
Placebo	A drug or treatment designed to appear identical to the actual treatment being tested, but lacking the active chemical. Placebos are sometimes referred to as sugar pills
Plantain	Used as an astringent, demulcent, diuretic, expectorant, and hemostatic. Also used externally for various skin problems, including ringworm, and as a douche for leucorrhea
Plaque	Deposit of fatty buildup in the inner lining of the walls of an artery
Plasma	Clear yellowish part of the blood, lymph or intramuscular fluid in which cells are suspended. Also contains dissolved proteins
Plasma Cell	Large oval shaped cell that contains deeply staining chromatin material and is associated with the production of immunoglobulins
Plasma-Derived Mediators	Proteins which circulate in the plasma. They are rarely active in their native state, and more often require activation to be functional
Plasma Expander	Blood expander
Plasma Membrane	Delicate structure which encloses the cell, separating the contents of the cell from the surrounding environment
Plasma Protein	Blood protein
Plasmids	Any extrachromosomal replicating unit or hereditary determinant, also called paragene
Plasminogen	Part of the blood
Platelet	Smaller than a red blood cell, found in the blood, promotes coagulation, Thrombocyte
Platelet-Activating Factor	PAF--Phospholipid that is produced especially by mast cells and basophils, causes the aggregation of blood platelets and the release of blood-platelet substances (as serotonin or histamine), is a mediator of inflammation (as in asthma) <BR>
Platelet Count	Thrombocytosis is seen in many inflammatory disorders and myeloproliferative states, as well as in acute or chronic blood loss, hemolytic anemias, carcinomatosis, status post-splenectomy, post- exercise, etc. Thrombocytopenia is divided pathophysiologically into production defects and consumption defects based on examination of the bone marrow aspirate or biopsy for the presence of megakaryocytes. Production defects are seen in Wiskott-Aldritch syndrome, May-Hegglin anomaly, Bernard-Soulier syndrome, Chediak-Higashi anomaly, Fanconi's syndrome, aplastic anemia, marrow replacement, megaloblastic and severe iron deficiency anemias, uremia, etc. Consumption defects are seen in autoimmune thrombocytopenias (including ITP and systemic lupus), DIC, TTP, congenital hemangiomas, hypersplenism, following massive hemorrhage, and in many severe infections
Platelet-Derived Growth Factor	A mitogenic growth factor that is found especially in platelets, consists of two polypeptide chains linked by bonds containing two sulfur atoms each, stimulates cell proliferation (as in connective tissue, smooth muscle, and neuroglia), and plays a role in wound healing <BR>
Platelet, Blood|Blood Platelet	One of the minute protoplasmic disks of vertebrate blood that assist in blood clotting, Platelet, Thrombocyte <BR>
PLC	Phospholipase C. Primary Liver Cancer
Pledget	Absorbent cotton used to apply medication or to absorb another substance
Pleurisy Root	Used in the treatment of bronchitis and other chest conditions. An effective diaphoretic and anti-spasmodic. Used to treat pleurisy and pneumonia. Reduces inflammations and assists expectoration
Pleuritic	Related to the lining of the lungs and chest cavity; when describing pain, meaning that the pain is increased with deep breathing
Plexus	Network
PMN	Polymorphonuclear Leukocytes
Pneumonia	Inflammation of the lung(s) caused by infection
po	Orally
PO2	The oxygen tension in arterial blood
Poisson Distribution	The distribution which arises when parasites are distributed at random amongst hosts
Polio	Highly contagious infectious disease caused by a filterable virus and occurs mostly in children ; in its acute form it involves the spinal cord causing paralysis
Poly	Combining form meaning many or much
Polyarthralgia	Pain in several joints unrelated to inflammation
Polyarthritis	Simultaneous inflammation of several joints
Polycystic Disease	Cystic degeneration of the liver usually associated with congential polycystic kidneys
Polycystic Liver	Congenital cystic disease of the liver
Polycythemia	Polycythemia is defined as an increase in total body erythrocyte mass. As opposed to the situation with anemias, the physician may directly measure rbc mass using radiolabeling by chromium-51, so as to differentiate polycythemia (absolute erythrocytosis, as seen in polycythemia vera, chronic hypoxia, smoker's polycythemia, ectopic erythropoietin production, methemoglobinemia, and high O2 affinity hemoglobins) from relative erythrocytosis (as seen in stress polycythemia and dehydration)
Polydipsia	Chronic thirst
Polymerase	Enzymes that catalyse the synthesis of nucleic acids on preexisting nucleic acid templates, assembling RNA from ribonucleotides or DNA from deoxyribonucleotides
Polymerase Chain Reaction	PCR--The first practical system for in vitro amplification of DNA and as such one of the most important recent developments in molecular biology. Two synthetic oligonucleotide primers, which are complementary to two regions of the target DNA (one for each strand) to be amplified, are added to the target DNA (that need not be pure), in the presence of excess deoxynucleotides and Taq polymerase, a heat stable DNA polymerase. In a series (typically 30) of temperature cycles, the target DNA is repeatedly denatured (around 90_C), annealed to the primers (typically at 50-60_C) and a daughter strand extended from the primers (72_C). As the daughter strands themselves act as templates for subsequent cycles, DNA fragments matching both primers are amplified exponentially, rather than linearly. The original DNA need thus be neither pure nor abundant and the polymerase chain reaction has accordingly become widely used not only in research, but in clinical diagnostics and forensic science
Polymorphic	In a variety of shapes
Polymorphism	Literally means "many shapes." A polymorphism is any physical manifestation between a species of living organisms which is variable through genetic influence. The blood types are a well-known polymorphism
Polyposis	Presence of several polyps
Polyprotein	A long polypeptide encoding several mature proteins which are subsequently released by protease cleavage
Polyps	Mass of tissue that protrudes from the mucous lining of an organ such as the intestine
Polysaccharides	Carbohydrates that can be broken down into two or more simple sugars
Polytherapy	Treatment using several drugs
Polyunsaturated Fat	Highly unsaturated fat that is found in greatest amounts in foods from plants, including corn, safflower, soybean and sunflower oils. When substituted for saturated fat, polyunsaturated fat helps reduce blood cholesterol
Polyuria	Production of excessive amounts of urine, causing frequent urination, in this case because of the loss of body water in the urine, accompanying the loss of large amounts of sugar (glucose)
Polyvalent	Specific for more than one antigen
Poorly Differentiated	Referring to a malignancy, not possessing histological characteristics of the originating tissues - usually a feature of pathological aggression
Porphyria Cutanea Tarda	A form of hepatic porphyria characterized by photosensitivity resulting in bullae that rupture easily to form shallow ulcers. This condition occurs in two forms: a sporadic, nonfamilial form that begins in middle age and has normal amounts of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase with diminished activity in the liver; and a familial form in which there is an autosomal dominant inherited deficiency of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase in the liver and red blood cells
Porphyria, Acute Intermittent|Acute Intermittent Porphyria|Porphyria	A form of hepatic porphyria characterized by periodic attacks of gastrointestinal disturbances, abdominal colic, paralyses, and psychiatric disorders. The onset of this condition is usually in the third or fourth decade of life
Porphyria, Hepatic|Hepatic Porphyria|Porphyria	Porphyria in which the liver is the site where excess formation of porphyrin or its precursors is found <BR>
Porta Hepatis	Also called Transverse Fissure. The fissure running transversely on the underside of the liver where most of the vessels enter or leave
Portacaval Shunt	A surgical shunt by which the portal vein is made to empty into the inferior vena cava in order to bypass a damaged liver
Portal	Communicating part or area of an organism, such as Portal Vein. The point at which something enters the body. Of or relating to the Porta Hepatis
Portal Circulation	Pertaining to the flow of blood through the portal vein
Portal Cirrhosis	Laennec's Cirrhosis
Portal Hypertension	From fibrosis and regenerative nodules, which disrupt the portal venous blood flow, increased pressure in the blood vessels entering the liver, which often occurs with cirrhosis. Portal hypertension can result in ascites or edema
Portal System	A system of veins that begins and ends in capillaries <BR>
Portal System, Hepatic|Hepatic Portal System|Portal System	A group of veins that carry blood from the capillaries of the stomach, spleen, intestine, and pancreas to the sinusoids of the liver
Portal Vein	Large vein through which oxygen-depleted blood from the spleen, intestines, gallbladder, stomach and the pancreas flows to the liver. The principle tributaries to the portal vein are the lienal vein, with blood from the stomach, the greater omentum -- a curtain of membrane and fat that hangs down over the intestines, the pancreas, the large intestine and the spleen; the superior mesenteric vein, with blood from the small intestine and part of the large intestine; the pyloric veins, with blood from the stomach; and the cystic veins, with blood from the gallbladder. In the liver the blood from the portal vein flows through a network of microscopic vessels called sinusoids in which the blood is relieved of worn out red cells, bacteria, and other debris and in which nutrients are added to the blood or removed from it for storage. The blood leaves the liver by way of the hepatic veins
Portal Venule	The final branch of the portal venous system that arises from a terminal portal vein or conducting PV, and enters the parenchyma to form a vascular septum. Also called a &quotseptal" PV
Post	After
Posterior	Towards or at the back of
Posthepatitic	Occurring after and especially as a result of hepatitis. Occurring or located behind the liver
Postnecrotic Cirrhosis	Cirrhosis of the liver following widespread necrosis of liver cells especially as a result of hepatitis
Posttransfusion Hepatitis	Hepatitis that occurs following a transfusion
Potassium	Mineral that serves as an electrolyte and is involved in the balance of fluid within the body. Our bodies contain more than twice as much potassium as sodium (typically nine ounces versus four ounces). About 98 percent of total body potassium is inside our cells. The principal cation (positive ion) of the fluid within cells. It is important in controlling the activity of the heart, muscles, nervous system and just about every cell in the body. Also regulates the water balance and base balance in the blood and tissues. Evidence is showing that potassium is also involved in bone calcification. Potassium is a co-factor in many reactions, especially those involving energy production and muscle building. Increase in serum potassium is seen in states characterized by excess destruction of cells, with redistribution of K+ from the intra- to the extracellular compartment, as in massive hemolysis, crush injuries, hyperkinetic activity, and malignant hyperpyrexia. Decreased renal K+ excretion is seen in acute renal failure, some cases of chronic renal failure, Addison's disease, and other sodium-depleted states. Hyperkalemia due to pure excess of K+ intake is usually iatrogenic. Drugs causing hyperkalemia include amiloride, aminocaproic acid, antineoplastic agents, epinephrine, heparin, histamine, indomethacin, isoniazid, lithium, mannitol, methicillin, potassium salts of penicillin, phenformin, propranolol, salt substitutes, spironolactone, succinylcholine, tetracycline, triamterene, and tromethamine. Spurious hyperkalemia can be seen when a patient exercises his/her arm with the tourniquet in place prior to venipuncture. Hemolysis and marked thrombocytosis may cause false elevations of serum K+ as well. Failure to promptly separate serum from cells in a clot tube is a notorious source of falsely elevated potassium. Decrease in serum potassium is seen usually in states characterized by excess K+ loss, such as in vomiting, diarrhea, villous adenoma of the colorectum, certain renal tubular defects, hypercorticoidism, etc. Redistribution hypokalemia is seen in glucose/insulin therapy, alkalosis (where serum K+ is lost into cells and into urine), and familial periodic paralysis. Drugs causing hypokalemia include amphotericin, carbenicillin, carbenoxolone, corticosteroids, diuretics, licorice, salicylates, and ticarcillin
Potassium Chloride	Potassium is a vital element in the body. Potassium supplements help prevent and treat potassium deficiency in people taking diuretics
Potentialization	Joint action of two drugs
Potentiation	Joint action of two drugs
Poultice	Soft mass, usually heated then spread on cloth and applied to sores or inflamed areas to relieve pain, supply warmth, or to act as a antiseptic or counterirritant
PP	Pancreatic Polypeptide
PPD	Purified Pprotein Derivative (tuberculin)
PPJ	Pure Pancreatic Juice
ppm	Parts Per Million
Pre	Prefix meaning in front of <BR>
Pre-existing Condition	A medical problem that existed before or at the time of a defined date
Precancerous	Unusual changes in body cells that may or may not become cancerous
Preclinical	Before the disease becomes recognizable
Precursor	Forerunner, Parent Substance
PRED	Prednisone
Predisposition	Tendency
Prednisone	Anti-inflammatory drug used in the treatment of arthritis, asthma, autoimmune hepatitis and given post transplant
Preoperative	Before an operation
Presentation	Angle
Presurface Protein 1, Hepatitis B SArface Antigen|Hepatitis B SArface Antigen|Presurface Protein 1	226 amino acid product of hepatitis B virus S gene + 163 amino acids; may be important in virion assembly infectivity
Presynaptic	Before a nerve/organ joint
Prevalence	The proportion of the host population infected (or with some marker of past or present infection) at a particular time. In regard to hepatitis, prevalence relates to the number of cases in the community at any one time. It is usually expressed as a percentage or ratio. eg. 1% of the population, or 1 in 100 people
Prevalence Models	Prevalence models are compartmental models dividing the host population into, for example, susceptible, latent, infectious and immune individuals
Prevention	Getting rid of or staying away from things or behaviors known to cause diseases
Prickly Ash Bark	Has anti-tubercular properties
Primary	First Primary Carcinoma of the Liver--Metastatic malignant neoplasm, ususally from breast, lung, or gastrointestinal cancer
Primary Lobule	The cone-shaped zone of parenchyma formed by the sinusoids given off by 2 adjacent portal venules. The primary lobule thus encompasses 2 portal venules, their inlet sinusoids, hepatic arterioles, bile ductules, and canals of Hering
prn	as needed
Pro	Prefix meaning before or in front of
Proanthocyanidins	Class of compounds found in the family of bioflavonoids
Probiotic	Refers to organisms and substances which contribute to intestinal microbial balance. They are beneficial or "friendly" intestinal bacteria
Proctitis	Inflammation of the rectum lining
Proctologist	Physician who specializes in treating disorders of the anus and rectum
Proctoscope	Short, rigid metal tube that can be inserted into the rectum and anus, permitting an internal examination of these organs
Prodromal	Fore running symptoms of infection. Occuring Before
Progeny	Offspring of animals or plants
Prognosis	Outlook, Prediction of probable outcome or course of a disease; Chance of recovery
Prolapse	Falling down or sinking in. Slipping or falling of a body part from its usual position
Proliferation	Multiplication
Proline	Non-essential amino acid. Helps maintain and strengthen heart muscles, important for the proper functioning of joints and tendons
Promiscuity	Sexual activity that is not limited to one partner
Prophylactic	Any agent or device that prevents or helps to prevent the development of disease
Prophylactic Medication	Medication that helps prevent disease
Prophylaxis	Prevention of disease. In Military Medicine--Measures taken to prevent or reduce the harmful effects of chemical agents
Propulsive	Driving
Prospective Study	A study in which people are initially enrolled and then followed up at subsequent times
Prostaglandin	Fatty acid
Prostate Gland	Gland in men that surrounds the neck of the bladder and the urethra and produces a secretion that liquefies coagulated semen
Protease	Enzyme that digests proteins. Any enzyme which acts upon the peptide bonds of proteins and peptides; a protein-splitting or hydrolyzing enzyme
Protein	Nitrogen rich compounds that are formed from a complex series of amino acids. Fundamental to many of the processes of life, fundamental building blocks for much of the substance of cellular and non-cellular life
Protein X, Woodchuck Hepatitis Virus|Protein X|Woodchuck Hepatitis Virus	RN refers to strain New York; amino acid sequence has been determined
Proteins	Nitrogenous organic compounds, containing more than about 100 amino acid residues, molecular weight 8,000-200,000, in vegetable and animal matter. Proteins yield amino acids on hydrolysis and are foods assimilated as amino acids and reconstructed in the protoplasm <BR>
Proteins, Viral|Proteins|Viral Proteins	Proteins found in any species of virus
Proteolytic	Property of a substance that breaks down proteins
Proteolyzed	Having been subjected to proteolysis
Prothrombin	Blood factor II
Prothrombin Time	PT--The ratio between the time it takes a test sample of blood to clot after addition of optimal quantities of calcium and the natural clotting stimulator thromboplastin compared with the time for a standard containing a normal quantity of the clotting precursor fibrinogen, which is reduced by the anticoagulant Coumadin
Protocol	Step by Step procedure that is followed in order to perform a task
Protozoon	Single cell creature
Provirus	Virus that has become and integral part of the host cell chromosome and is transmitted from one cell generation to another
Proximal	Nearest to or next to a point of reference
Prurigo	Chronic inflammatory skin disease marked by a general eruption of small, itching, pus-filled bumps
Pruritic	Itchy
Pruritus	Itching
PS	Pyloric Stenosis
PSC	Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
Pseudo	Combining form signifying false or spurious
Pseudotumor	Tumor like growth
psi	Pounds per Square Inch
Psoriasis	Common chronic, squamous dermatosis, marked by exacerbations and remissions and having a polygenic inheritance pattern. The most distinctive histological findings in well-developed psoriasis are Munro microabscesses and spongiform pustules. It is characterized clinically by the presence of rounded, circumscribed, erythematous, dry, scaling patches of various sizes, covered by grayish white or silvery white, umbilicated, and lamellar scales, which have a predilection for the extensor surfaces, nails, scalp, genitalia, and lumbosacral region. Central clearing and coalescence of the lesions produce a wide variety of clinical configurations, including annular or circinate, discoid or nummular, figurate, and gyrate arrangements. Also called psoriasis vulgaris
PSPD	Posterior Superior Pancreaticoduodenal Artery
PSU	Primary Site Undetermined
Psychogenic	Caused by mental factors
Psycholeptic	Hopelessness and inertia related
Psychosomatic	The production of physical illness or symptoms by emotional or psychological disturbance, with absent or limited awareness
Psychotropic	Mood altering drug
Psyllium	Plantago Psyllium. Helps rid the body of excess cholesterol. Excellent laxative that offers relief from hemorrhoid and gastrointestinal irritations
PTHBD	Percuateous Transhepatic Biliary Dishcharge
PTHC	Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography
PTSD	Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
PU	Peptic Ulcer
PUD	Peptic Ulcer Disease
PUFA	Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
Pulmonary Embolism	Obstruction of blood vessels in the lung,or pulmonary artery by a blood clot or other material
Pulse	A pulsating artery that gives evidence that the heart is beating, usually about 70 times per minute
Pumpkin Seed	- Has the ability to rid the body of intestinal parasites such as roundworms and tapeworms
Punctum	Spot, point or minute orifice
Purgative	Strong laxative, Substance that causes vigorous evacuation of the bowels
Purge	Cleanse, to get rid of anything undesirable
Purpura	Blood spots, bruising and discoloring to skin. Bleeding under the skin.
Purulent	Pusy, containing, consisting of, forming pus, Foul
PV	Portal Vein
Pycnogenol	Trademark for specific bioflavonoids extracted from pine bark. Reduces inflammation and the pain of arthritis and other conditions, an antioxidant, fighting the corrosive free radicals that damage cells and promote a variety of life-threatening conditions, Stabilizes the vital protein collagen, improving skin and blood vessel health
Pygeum	Used for the treatment of prostatic hypertrophy
Pylorus	Opening from the stomach into the duodenum
Pyogenic	Formation of pus
Pyrexia	Fever
Pyridoxine	Vitamin B-6. A B-complex vitamin that plays a role as a coenzyme in the breakdown and utilization of carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Facilitates the release of glycogen for energy from the liver and muscles. Also participates in the utilization of energy in the brain and nervous tissue and is essential for the regulation of the central nervous system. A deficiency of Pyridoxine may result in anemia, insomnia, nervousness, skin eruptions, loss of hair, loss of muscular control, mouth disorders, muscular weakness, dermatitis, arm & leg cramps, slow learning, and water retention
Pyrogenic|Pyrogen	Fever inducing, capable of producing fever; Of or relating to the production of a fever
Pyrosis	Heartburn
PYY	Peptide YY
q	Every iteration, i.e. a med of Q5min would be every five minutes, or Q6h is every 6 hours. Every
q 4 h	Every 4 hours, etc
q.v.	Abbreviation for "as much as you wish"
qid	4 Times a day
Quack	A pretender to medical skill; a medical charlatan
Quackery	The practice of medicine by a quack
Quadrant	One of the four regions into which the abdomen may be divided for purposes of physical diagnosis
Quadrate	Square, four sided
Quadrate Lobe	A small lobe of the liver on the underside of the right lobe to the left of the fissure for the gallbladder
Quadratus	Muscle having four sides
Quadri, Quadru|Quadri|Quadru	Combining form meaning four
Quantitative	Number or quantity, pertaining to measurement
Quartan	Recurring at about 72 hour intervals, on the fourth day
Quaternary	Fourth
Queen of the Meadow	Used for rheumatic and gouty conditions caused by uric acid deposits in the joints. It has a stimulating effect on glands and organs that clear the body of toxins and wastes, which makes it helpful in most forms of inflammatory distress
Questran	Cholestyramine--Primarily used to reduce high blood levels of total cholesterol, relieve itching due to deposit of bile acids in the skin caused by partial biliary obstruction
Quiescent	Inactive, dormant. A period during which an infection is present but not active within a host: for example the period between an acute attack of chickenpox (varicella) and a subsequent recrudescence of shingles (zoster)
Quinidine	Medicine often used to correct irregular heartbeat. Brand names of quinidine include Quinalan and Quiniglute
Quintan	Recurring every fifth day
Quotidian	Recurring every day
RA	Rheumatoid Arthritis
Radiation Effects	Effects of ionizing and nonionizing radiation upon living organisms, organs and tissues, and their constituents, and upon physiologic processes. It includes the effect of irradiation on drugs and chemicals
Radiation Therapy	Treatment to kill cancer cells with high energy rays from x-rays or other sources <BR>
Radiography	X-ray
Radiological	X-ray related
Ranitidine	Drug used to control ulcer pain and to aid in the healing of peptic ulcers by cutting down on the amount of acid the stomach secretes
Rate	The number of events happening divided by the length of time over which they happen. A rate of change is the amount of change happening in a interval divided by the length of the interval
Rate of infection	Degree of speed or progression of an epidemic
RBC	Red Blood Cell, Red Blood Count
RBC (Red Blood Cell) Count|RBC Count|Red Blood Cell Count	The RBC count is most useful as raw data for calculation of the erythrocyte indices MCV and MCH. Decreased RBC is usually seen in anemia of any cause with the possible exception of thalassemia minor, where a mild or borderline anemia is seen with a high or borderline high RBC. Increased RBC is seen in erythrocytotic states, whether absolute (polycythemia vera, erythrocytosis of chronic hypoxia) or relative (dehydration, stress polycthemia), and in thalassemia minor [see &quotHemoglobin," below, for discussion of anemias and erythrocytoses]. Hemoglobin, Hematocrit, MCV (Mean Corpuscular Volume), MCH (Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin), MCHC (Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin Concentration). Strictly speaking, anemia is defined as a decrease in total body red cell mass. For practical purposes, however, anemia is typically defined as hemoglobin
RBV	Ribavirin
RDA	Recommended Daily Allowance
RDW	Red cell Distribution Width--Red cell distribution width is a numerical expression which correlates with the degree of anisocytosis (variation in volume of the population of red cells). Some investigators feel that it is useful in differentiating thalassemia from iron deficiency anemia, but its use in this regard is far from universal acceptance. The RDW may also be useful in monitoring the results of hematinic therapy for iron-deficiency or megaloblastic anemias. As the patient's new, normally-sized cells are produced, the RDW initially increases, but then decreases as the normal cell population gains the majority <BR>
RE	Regional Eneritis
Re-treatment	Starting treatment again after the patient has had a relapse of a disease or did not respond to the first treatment
Reabsorption	Absorbing again
Reactive Oxygen Species	(ROS) Molecules including free radicals and other oxygen species
Reagent	Reactive substance
Rebefacient	Substance used externally that causes redness of the skin
Rebound Acid Secretion	Return of acid secretion when the effect of antacid is gone. Rebound effect may be more severe than before treatment
Rebound Congestion	Return of congestion when the effect of medication is gone. Rebound effect may be more severe than before treatment
Receptor	A specific molecule on the surface of a cell which is used by a virus for attachment
Receptor Site	Structure of protein on the outside of the cell membrane - receptor sites allow cells to identify each other and serve as attachment points for biological substances that produce a alterations in cell function. Viruses use receptor sites to identify a host cell and attach to it
Recombinant	Produced from more than one source. Relating to or exhibiting genetic recombination, Relating to or containing recombinant DNA. Produced by recombinant DNA technology. An individual exhibiting recombination
Recombinant DNA	DNA chain that has been altered through insertion of a new sequence using bioengineering. Genetically engineered DNA prepared in vitro by cutting up DNA molecules and splicing together specific DNA fragments usu. from more than one species of organism
Reconstitution	Regeneration, continuous repair of progressive destruction of tissues. Returning a substance to its original form or state
Recreational Drugs	Illegal drugs such as cocaine, heroin, marijuana, speed, crank, LSD, crack
Recrudescence	Reappearance of disease in a host whose infection has been quiescent
Rectum	Extreme lower end of the large intestine leading to the anus
Rectus Muscles	Two abdominal muscles that run from the lower ribs to the pelvis on either side of the midline and are responsible for maintaining abdominal tone
Recurrent	Recurring, returning, turning back in its course
Red Blood Cell	Any of the hemoglobin-containing cells that carry oxygen to the tissues and are responsible for the red color of blood
Red Clover	Used as a antibiotic, appetite suppressant, blood purifier, and relaxant
Red Raspberry	Rich in iron and nutrients, used to treat anemia
Red Root	Ceanothus Americanus--Exhibits astringent, antispasmodic, antisyphilitic expectorant and sedative properties. Used to treat asthma, chronic bronchitis, consumption, dysentery, and whooping cough, also as a mouth wash and gargle, and as an injection in gleet, gonorrhea, and leucorrhoea
Reducers	Compounds such as antioxidants that accept electrons
Reducing Agent	(Reductant) The electron donor in an oxidation-reduction reaction
REE	Resting Energy Expenditure
Reference	Of known potency and used as a standard in the biological assay of a sample of the same drug of unknown strength
Reflux	Return flow, when liquid backs up into the esophagus from the stomach. Backward flow
Reflux Esophagitis	Inflammation of the esophagus because of the backwash of stomach contents into the esophagus
Refractory	Not responding to treatment
Refrigerant	Substance capable of cooling body temperature or allaying thirst
Regurgitation	Backward flow of gastric juice, gas, or small amounts of food from the stomach to the mouth
Rehmannia Root	A demulcent, laxative, provides energy, stops bleeding, and strengthens the immune system. Used to treat anemia, fatigue, and to promote the healing of broken bones
Reishi Mushroom	Also called Ling-Zhi. Used as a sedative and tonic. Used to lower cholesterol, prevent blood clots, help prevent the growth of tumors, Arthritis, Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Diabetes, Hypertension, Nervous exhaustion and Liver disorders
Rejection	an immune response against grafted tissue, which, if not successfully treated, results in failure of the graft to survive
Relapse	Return of the symptoms of disease after the disease was thought to be cured
Relative Risk	The proportion of diseased people amongst those exposed to the relevant risk factor divided by the proportion of diseased people amongst those not exposed to the risk factor. This should be used in those cohort studies where those with and without disease are followed to observe which individuals become diseased
Release	The stage of viral replication at which virus particles escape the infected cell
Remission	Partial or complete disappearance of the symptoms of a disease. This may be naturally occurring or as the result of therapy
Renal	Kidney related
Renin	Enzyme
Replicated	Folded over or backward; folded back upon itself; as, a replicate leaf or petal; a replicate margin of a shell
Replication	Duplication. A turning back of a part so as to form a duplication. The process of duplicating or reproducing, as the replication of an exact copy of a polynucleotide strand of DNA or RNA. Replicatio means a fold backwards
Reproductive Ratio--Basic reproductive ratio|Basic reproductive ratio|Reproductive Ratio	Ro, a dimensionless parameter which encapsulates the biological details of different transmission mechanisms. For microparasites, Ro, is defined as the average number of secondary cases of infection to which one primary case gives rise throughout its infectious period if introduced into a defined population consisting solely of susceptible individuals. Effective reproductive ratio-- R, The number of secondary cases (microparasites) or female offspring (macroparasites) produced in a host population not consisting entirely of susceptible individuals (microparasites) or within which density dependent constraints limit parasite population growth (macroparasites) <BR>
Research	Careful, a diligent search, a close searching, studious inquiry or examination
Resection	Removal of any part of the body. Whatever is removed is said to have been resected
Resistance	The reduction, due to genetic selection, of susceptibility of a parasite or its vector to chemotherapy. The ability of a host to resist a pathogen
Respirations	Breaths; the act of inhaling and exhaling
Response Rate	Percentage of treated patients who respond positively to medical treatment
Restorative	Substance that helps to bring a person to consciousness or back to normal vigor, Out of alpha series
Retard	Delay
Retardation	Delaying
Retinopathy	Eye disorder that does not cause inflammation but results from changes in the eye (retinal) blood vessels
Retraction	Moving backwards. Drawing back, the condition of being drawn back
Retransplantation	Due to organ rejection or transplant failure, some patients need another transplant and return to the waiting list.
Retrobulbar	Behind a link
Retrograde	Backwards
Retrospective Study	A study in which people are enrolled and then have their history of risks, infections or disease measured
Retrovaccination	The inoculation of a cow with human vaccine virus
Retroviral Vector	See Retroviridae. Retroviral vectors are used in the genetic modification of cells as a means of introducing foreign DNA into the genome. For example: retroviral vector 's encoding histochemical markers (reporter genes) are used in the study of neural cell lineage in vertebrates. Retroviral vector's may contain the bacterial lacZ gene that encodes for the enzyme _ galactosidase. When the retrovirally infected cells divide, they replicate the foreign DNA. Progeny of infected cells will therefore express the protein and can then be detected histochemically
Retroviridae	Viruses with a single stranded RNA genome (Class VI). On infecting a cell the virus generates a DNA replica by action of its virally coded reverse transcriptase. Oncovirinae are one of three subclasses of retroviruses, the others being Lentivirinae and Spumavirinae
Retrovirus	Any of a family of RNA viruses containing reverse transcriptase in the virion. Retroviruses proliferate by a process that is the reverse of normal viruses. Reverse transcriptase enables the virus to convert viral RNA into DNA. This reverses the normal process of transcription where DNA is converted into RNA
Reverse Transcriptase	RNA directed DNA polymerase. Enzyme first discovered in retroviruses, that can construct double stranded DNA molecules from the single stranded RNA templates of their genomes. Reverse transcription now appears also to be involved in movement of certain mobile genetic elements, such as the Ty plasmid in yeast, in the replication of other viruses such as Hepatitis B and possibly in the generation of mammalian pseudogenes
Reye's Syndrome	An acute disease in children characterized by vomiting, hepatic injury with fatty vacuolization, central nervous system damage, and hypoglycemia
RF	Rheumatoid Factor; Rheumatic Fever
Rhagade	Lines
Rheumatic Syndrome	Symptoms resembling a rheumatic disease, such as arthritis
Rheumatoid Arthritis	Disease involving joints and other tissues. Results in crippling joint deformities
Rhinovirus	Virus that causes the common cold
RHL	Right Hepatic Lobe
Rhubarb Root	Considered a mild laxative that produces a soft stool 6-10 hours after ingestion. Works well in children because of its mild action
RI	Regional Ileitis
RIBA	Recombinant Immunoblot Assay--Assay that verifies the presence of Hepatitis C antibodies in the bloodstream
Ribavirin	Drug initially used in the treatment of asthma. Now being used in the treatment of Hepatitis C in conjuction with Interferon. An antiviral medicine
Riboflavin	Vitamin B-2. A B-complex vitamin that acts as a coenzyme that activates the breakdown and utilization of carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Essential for cellular oxidation and necessary for healthy skin and eyes. Helps in the formation of antibodies & red blood cells; is necessary for the maintenance of good vision, nails & hair; alleviates eye fatigue, promotes general health. A deficiency of Riboflavin may result in bloodshot eyes, cracks & sores in the mouth & lips, dermatitis, digestive disturbances, itching & burning eyes, purplish tongue, retarded growth, trembling, sluggishness, and oily skin
Ribosome	One of the minute granules free in the cytoplasm or attached to the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell, containing a high concentration of RNA. The cell's factories.- They are the place where all protein synthesis occurs. Messenger RNA (mRNA) messages from the nucleus are translated by the ribosomes, which build the encoded proteins
Rift Valley Fever	Febrile disease resembling dengue. It is caused by a mosquito-borne arbovirus <BR>
Right Lymphatic Duct	A short vessel that receives lymph from the right side of the head, neck, and thorax, the right arm, right lung, right side of the heart, and convex surface of the liver and that discharges it into the right subclavian vein at its junction with the right internal jugular vein
Rigidity	Stiffness
Rigors	Muscle rigidity or stiffness
Ringer's Solution	An intravenous solution consisting of salt, potassium, and calcium boiled in water used to treat dehydration
Risk Factor	A habit, trait, or condition in a person that is associated with an increased chance (or risk) for developing a disease. Smoking, I.V. drug use, tattoos, needle sticks etc are considered "Risk Factors"
Risk Reduction	Behaviors or ways used to lessen the chance of getting a disease
RLQ	Right Lower Quadrant
RNA Editing	Specific alterations of RNAs, for example C_V changes that are not coded for in the genes
RNA Life	A hypothetical life form lacking DNA and protein which may have existed on early earth and in which RNA served both a genetic coding and a catalytic function
RNA Plasmid	dsRNA found in yeasts, also called killer factors. Their nomenclature is uncertain and some scientists consider them viruses
RNA Polymerase	An enzyme that polymerise ribonucleotides in accordance with the information present in DNA
RNA Primase	An RNA polymerase that synthesises a short RNA primer sequence to initiate DNA replication
RNA Primer	The primer sequence synthesised by RNA Primase
RNA Processing	Modifications of primary RNA trancripts including splicing, cleavage, base modification, capping and the addition of poly A tails
RNA--Ribonucleic Acid|RNA|Ribonucleic Acid	Genetic material similar to DNA. It often acts as a ‘message’ that is delivered to cells, prompting them to change and prepare for reproduction. Molecules found in all cells which translate DNA genetic information into protein. RNA is much less stable than DNA, and mutates frequently during its reproduction. For this reason, all life forms (with the exception some viruses) use it only as a temporary messenger molecule to carry information that is permanently stored in DNA. A nucleic acid found in all living cells. Plays a role in transferring information from DNA to the protein-forming system of the cell <BR>
RNA Splicing	The removal of introns from primary RNA transcripts
RNA Splicing Pattern	The combination of DNA sequences copied from a gene by messenger RNA. The mRNAs transcribed from a single gene may splice together different parts of the sequence of the gene
RNA Tumor Virus	Oncovirinae. The family of retroviruses (Retroviridae) that can cause tumours. They are enveloped by membrane derived from the plasma membrane of the host cell, from which they are released by budding without lysing the cell. Within each virion is a pair of single stranded RNA molecules. Replication involves a DNA intermediate made on an RNA template by the enzyme reverse transcriptase
RNA Virus	Specialized set of viruses that use RNA, rather than DNA, for the storage of their genetic information. One of the reproductive substances found in the body which rejuvenates cellular activity
RNA, Transfer, Amino Acyl|Amino Acyl|Transfer RNA	Intermediates in protein biosynthesis. The compounds are formed from amino acids, ATP and transfer RNA, a reaction catalyzed by aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. They are key compounds in the genetic translation process <BR>
Rose Hips	Good for all infections and bladder problems, helps combat stress
Rosemary	Rosemary oil is a strong antioxidant, contributes substantially to the calming and soothing of tense nerves and muscles. Rosemary leaf is used as an analgesic, headache remedy, muscle stimulant and antimalarial, aids digestion and relieves cramps. Large doses of rosemary oil and other rosemary preparations can put pregnancy at risk. Avoid using rosemary oil in any amount if you are pregnant. Small doses can cause stomach, kidney and intestinal problems, and large amounts can be poisonous. If you're pregnant, avoid using the herb altogether medicinally, although it's okay to use as a seasoning
Round Ligament	A fibrous cord resulting from the obliteration of the umbilical vein of the fetus and passing from the navel to the notch in the anterior border of the liver and along the undersurface of that organ
Route of Transmission	Route or way that a disease is transmitted
Routinely	Usually
RP	Resting Pressure
RQ	Respiratory Quotient
RR	Renin Release, Relative Risk
RRR	Renin-release Rate
RUOQ	Right Upper Outer Quadrant
RUQ	Right Upper Quadrant
s.c.	Subcutaneous(ly)
Sage	Sage has been shown to soothe sore throats, fight diabetes, control perspiration, and aids in digestion. If inflammation of the lips and the lining of the mouth occur from ingestion of sage tea, discontinue use
Sago Liver	One affected with amyloid degeneration, the acini resembling boiled sago grains, i.e., translucent granules 2 or 3 mm in diameter
Saline Solution	A blood volume substitute made of salt and water, a temporary substitute for lost blood
Salivary Glands	The salivary glands include the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. They produce enzymes that aid in the breakdown of starches
Salve	Soothing or healing ointment
Sandimmune®	Cyclosporin--an earlier formulation of cyclosporine. An immunosuppressive drug used with other immunosuppressive drugs, that acts specifically to inhibit helper T cells, thereby helping prevent the rejection of a transplanted organ. Sandimmune and Neoral are not bioequivalent and cannot be used interchangeably without physician supervision
SaO2	Arterial oxygen saturation
Sarcoma	Tumor
Sarsaparilla	S. Aristolochiaefolia-Mexican. S. Refelii-Honduran. S. Febrifuga-Ecuadorian. All three types of sarsaparilla are species of the genus Smilax and belong to the family Smilacaceae. Contains saponins which are derived mainly from sarsapogenin and smilagenin. The plant is also used as a flavoring agent, often in soft drinks such as root beer. Sarsaparilla root attacks microbial substances in the blood stream, and neutralizes them. Used for coughs, hypertension, pleurisy, wounds, sore eyes, burns, and as a diuretic <BR>
SART	Standard Acid Reflux Test
Saturated Fat	Type of fat found in greatest amounts in foods from animals such as meat, poultry, and whole-milk dairy products like cream, cheese, ice cream, and milk . Other examples of saturated fat include butter, the marbling and fat along the edges of meat, and lard and the saturated fat content is high in some vegetable oils-like coconut, palm kernel, and palm oils. Saturated fat raises blood cholesterol more than anything else in the diet
Saw Palmetto Berry	Sarena Serrulata. A small palm tree with red berries which were used by Native American Indians to ease certain ailments. The red berries contain high concentrations of plant sterols, including B-sistosterol, which act as anti-inflammatory agents. The berries provide a variety of fatty acids and phytosterols which inhibit the action of dihydrotestosterone, the compound thought to be responsible for the enlargement of the prostate. Used for treating the prostate <BR>
SB	Serum Bilirubin, Small Bowel
SBE	Subacute Bacterial Endocarditis
SBFT	Small Bowel Follow Through
SBO	Small Bowel Obstruction
SBP	Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis
SCFA	Short Chain Fatty Acid
Schizandra	Schizandra Chinensis. Western herbalists commonly recommend Schizandra for the lungs, liver and kidneys, and to help with depression due to adrenergic exhaustion. In Russia, Schizandra is used to treat eye fatigue and increase acuity. Schizandra should not be used during pregnancy except under medical supervision to promote uterine contractions during labor. Schizandra should be avoided by persons with peptic ulcers, epilepsy and high blood pressure
Sclerosis	Hardening
Screening	Analyzing blood for all known diseases
Scutellariae	Scutellaria Lateriflora. (S. Baicalensis. S. Galericulata. S. Scordiifolia. Species of the plant Scullcap which has four different species of Scutellariae that have been employed in medicine. Said to have tranquilizing and antispasmodic effects. S. lateriflora is a member of the family Lamiaceae and the overground parts of this plant are known as Scullcap
Sea Holly	Sea Holly exhibits aromatic, diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant and stimulant properties. The roots are also considered good in obstructions of the liver and in jaundice, operating as a diuretic and a good restorative
sec	Second
Second Generation Hepatitis C Antibody Tests	These were developed after 1992 and search for more specific ‘signs’ of the hepatitis C virus. Because these tests identify more parts of the antibody, they are more sensitive and specific than the original first generation tests
Secondary Lobule	A unit made up of 6 primary lobules with the terminal hepatic vein in the center and 6 portal tracts at the periphery, and bordered by terminal portal venules. In 2 dimensions, it corresponds to the classic lobule
Secretin	An intestinal proteinaceous hormone capable of stimulating secretion by the pancreas and liver
Secretor	A person who secretes the ABO antigen into their body secretions. A secretor could be blood typed from semen, perspiration or saliva. About 85% of the general population are secretors
Sed Rate	Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, a red blood count used to determine inflammation and tissue destruction
Sedative	Agent that tends to tranquilize, calm, allay nervousness or irritation
Sedimentation Rate	Sedimentation rate, or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), is a type of blood test. It is performed by placing blood containing an anticoagulant in a long, narrow glass tube and observing the speed at which the red blood cells settle and form a sediment at the bottom. Abnormally slow sedimentation rates occur in the presence of any serious infection, malignancy, or inflammatory disorder. The test does not diagnose any particular disorder, but indicates that one might be present
SEIR Model	A class of compartmental prevalence models, with compartments Susceptible, Latent (Exposed), Infectious and Recovered
Selenium	Essential mineral involved primarily in enzymes that are antioxidants. Three selenium containing enzymes are antioxidant peroxidases and a fourth selenium containing enzyme is involved in thyroid hormone production. The prostate contains a selenium-containing protein and semen contains relatively large amounts of selenium. Selenium is important in lowering the risk of several types of cancers and diseases of the heart & blood vessels. Increased Selenium intake decreases the risk of breast, colon, lung and prostate cancer. It also preserves tissue elasticity; slows down the aging & hardening of tissues through oxidation, and helps in the treatment & prevention of dandruff. Selenium toxicity can occur if administered improperly, so the dose of selenium should be close to 100 Microgram (not milligrams) per day
Self Administration	Therapy that patients give to themselves, such as interferon injections instead of a healthcare provider doing it for them
Senna	An ingredient in many laxatives. Senna has a terrible taste. Herbalists generally discourage using the plant material and instead recommend the over the counter laxatives that contain Senna. Large doses can cause diarrhea, nausea and severe abdominal cramping that can lead to dehydration. Senna should never be used for more than two weeks. Never give to children under 2 years of age
Sense Strand	Most genetic material, both DNA and RNA, appears as two chains or strands of nucleotides wound together into a double helix . The common picture of DNA. Each nucleotide - A, T, C and G - has an attractive opposite (C attracts G, A attracts T). As a result, one strand, the &quotsense" strand, contains the information (for example, ATG-AAA) and the other strand, the &quotantisense" strand contains the opposite of this information (TAC-TTT according to the pairing rules). Antisense RNA is the &quotantisense" half of a complete double RNA strand. RNA viruses consist of two types, &quotsense" RNA viruses, whose genetic material consists of the &quotsense" half of a complete strand, and &quotantisense" RNA viruses, which have the &quotantisense" half. Sense RNA viruses can have their genetic material read out directly by the ribosomes of their host cells - antisense RNA viruses must first copy themselves into a &quotsense" strand of RNA <BR>
Sensitivity	The ability of a test to work on people you know have the infection. More precisely TP/(TP+FN), where TP is the number of true positives and FN is the number of false negatives
Sensitized	Being immunized, or able to mount an immune response, against an antigen by previous exposure to that antigen
Sensory	Sense-related
Sepsis	A serious blood-borne bacterial infection of the blood. More common in the elderly and in neonates. Symptoms include chills, decreased urine output, high fever, and a decreased level of consciousness
Septum	Dividing wall
Sequelae	Complication
Serine	L-Serine. A nonessential amino acid occurring in natural form as the L-isomer. A storage source of glucose by the liver and muscles; helps strengthen the immune system by providing antibodies, synthesizes the fatty acid sheath around nerve fibers <BR>
Seroconversion	Development of resistance
Serological	Blood study related
Serological Testing	The process of scientifically examining blood serum
Serology	The study of antigen-antibody reactions. More generally, the use of serotype data to infer an individual's history of infection
Seronegative	When one tests negative for a particular test. ie. Being tested for Hepatitis and the results are negative
Seropositive	When one tests postive for a particular test. ie. Being tested for Hepatitis and the test results are postive. An individual whose serotype suggests that they have experienced infection in the past
Seroprevalence	The proportion of a population who are seropositive
Serotonin	A necessary brain chemical. One of the four main neuro-humors or neuro-transmitters in higher vertebrate nervous systems. Serotonin is transported via the bloodstream to the nerve cells throughout the body, but most especially in the neurons of the brain. Here they accumulate in their minute molecular form. The molecule serotonin is utilized by the nerve cells for the complete execution of electrical impulses across the synaptic gap. Serotonin is produced in the gut of the intestinal tract as well as the Pineal organ. Serotonin will convert naturally to melatonin, which occurs chemically in the pineal gland. The pineal gland is the only area in the body where this is done. Research has demonstrated a strong link between appetite, mood, pain awareness, sleep and Serotonin. Abnormalities in the amount of Serotonin available to the brain have been linked with Aggression, Anxiety, Alcohol abuse, Depression, Drug abuse, Eating disorders, particularly bulimia and binge eating, as well as some forms of obesity, Headaches, including Migraines, Irritability, Insomnia and other sleep disorders, Mood swings and Mania, Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) especially moodiness &amp; food cravings, Obsessive compulsive behavior, Seasonal affective disorder (SAD), Poor impulse control, and heightened sensitivity to pain <BR>
Serotype	The range of antibodies which an individual possesses, usually based on sampling from blood serum or saliva. Different strains of a pathogen can sometimes be distinguished by the different antibodies they induce in a host, or with which they can be made to react in vitro; thus the word serotype has also come to be applied to a particular strain (`the virulent serotype'). This is the more common clinical usage. The range of antibodies used to define a serotype obviously depends on those available to the researcher. Sometimes, as for measles, the presence of a known antibody within the serum of an individual correlates extremely well with the clinical observation that that individual is protected against any further infections. But sometimes, as for malaria, there is as yet no definite relationship between a given serotype and the presence of a functional immunity, which may make the use of the word serotype unhelpful when trying to distinguish between different parasites for the purposes of understanding transmission
Serous	Of or relating to, producing, or resembling serum; having a thin watery constitution
Serum	Fluid portion of blood Serum Amylase Enzyme Test --Test for pancreatitis
Serum Hepatitis	Form of viral hepatitis transmitted by exposure to human blood or blood products contaminated with hepatitis viruses, or injection
Sexual Transmission	The passage of infection from one individual to another thru sex. The sexual route can include all sexual activities, although the level of infection risk is higher for certain behaviors
SF	Cerebrospinal Fluid
SGOT	See AST
SGPT	See ALT, An enzyme that is found primarily in the liver. It is released into the bloodstream as the result of liver damage. Also called the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT)
Sharps Container	Specially designed receptacle for the safe disposal of needles
Shavegrass	Also known as Horsetail. Supplies calcium to the body, and is rich in several other minerals that the body uses to rebuild injured tissue. Research shows that Shavegrass increases the number of phagocytes (enzymes that kill germs and other foreign substances), which improves the functioning of the entire immune system. Used to treat Bronchitis, lung and respiratory tract disorders. Externally, Shavegrass can be applied as a poultice
Sheep Sorrel	Also called Common Sorrel. Used as an astringent, diuretic, and laxative agent. Tea made from the leaves and stem will act as a diuretic, and may be helpful for stones. Tea made from the leaves and flowers of this plant can provide effective relief for throat and mouth ulcers. Externally, this herbal ingredient is effective in treating various skin conditions. A decoction made from the root has been used successfully to treat excessive menstruation and hemorrhage in the stomach
Shepherd's Purse	Reduces urinary tract irritation and atony. Clears up blood in the urine, and may eliminate mild forms of hemorrhage. Is effective in treating menorrhagia characterized by lengthy and frequent almost-colorless flow <BR>
Shiitake Mushroom	Lentinus Edodes. Also known as Japanese mushroom. Builds resistance against viruses, helps control cholesterol level, for preventing high blood pressure and heart disease, and fighting diseases such as cancer. Research suggests that lentinan may work by enhancing the immune system's ability to fight infection
Shingles	Infection of the ganglia of the posterior roots of the spinal nerves or the fifth cranial nerve by the varcella-zoster virus, which also causes chicken pox; it is marked by a painful eruption of vesicles usually on one side of the body along the course of one or more cutaneous nerves
Shock	A circulatory disturbance marked by a severe drop in blood pressure, rapid pulse, clammy skin, pallor, and a rapid heart rate
Shunt	Bypass
SI	International System of Units
Sialagogue	Agent that produces a flow of saliva
Sida Cordifolia	Contains ephedrine alkaloids common to the Ephedra plant (also known as Ma-Huang). Sida Cordifolia contains other bronchodilating principles which Ma-Huang does not have, these are vasicinone, vasicine, and vasicinol. Considered to have diaphoretic, diuretic, central nervous system stimulating and anti-asthmatic activity. Useful in the treatment of chronic broncho-pulminary conditions characterized by bronchospasm and cough. Also used to treat bronchial asthma cold &amp; flu, aching joints and bones, chills, lack of perspiration, headache, nasal congestion, cough &amp; wheezing, and edema <BR>
Side Effects	Drugs and herbal therapies may produce both desirable and undesirable effects. The undesirable effects are referred to as side effects. They can often be reduced by reducing the dosage of the drug or using a purer formulation
Siderophores	Low-molecular-weight compounds produced by microorganisms that aid in the transport and sequestration of ferric iron
SIF	Serum Inhibitory Factors
Sigmoid	S-shaped
Sigmoidoscope	Rigid or flexible endoscope used to look into the anus, rectum, and sigmoid colon
Sign	Any evidence of disease
Silent Gallstones	Gallstones that cause no symptoms and are discovered by ultrasound, x-ray, or surgery <BR>
Silicon	Non-essential mineral. Tissues such as arteries, connective tissue, skin, tendons, cornea and sclera (white of the eye) contain relatively large amounts of silicon. Collagen, the protein glue that holds us together, contains silicon in silanolate form. While vitamin C functions only as a catalyst in the formation of collagen, silicon is actually a structural part of collagen. Silicon containing substances are found in all cartilage and in the material binding cells together. Silicon may be needed for proper bone structure and growth
Sinusoid	A minute endothelium lined space or passage for blood in the tissues of an organ such as the liver
Situs Inversus	A congenital abnormality characterized by lateral transposition of the viscera, such as of the heart or the liver)
Skullcap	Some herbalists strongly recommend it for the relief of headache and related pain, while others do not. Used to treat convulsions, insomnia, nervous diseases, neuralgia, restlessness and tetanus. Has also been recommended for delirium tremens, neuralgia, and rheumatism. American Indians used the plant to promote menstruation, and it was reputed to be effective against rabies
Skunk Cabbage	Exhibits anti-spasmodic, diaphoretic, and expectorant properties. Used to relax and ease irritable coughs. Can also be used to treat asthma, bronchitis and whooping cough. As a diaphoretic, it will aid the body during fevers
SLE	Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Slippery Elm	Also called American elm, Indian elm, Moose elm, Red elm, Rock elm, Wweet elm, and Winged elm. Used as a demulcent, diuretic, and emollient. Is very effective, both internally and externally (in poultices), against sore & inflamed mucous membranes, considered one of the best agents for combating coughs.
SMAC 25	A blood chemistry panel, often used as a general screening tool, which includes measurement of sodium, potassium, chloride, C02, creatinine, BUN, glucose, uric acid, calcium, phosphorus, total protein, albumin, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), glutamic pyruvic transpeptidase (SGPT) (ALT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), creatine phosphokinase (CPK), cholesterol, triglycerides, amylase, lactic acid, and magnesium in the blood
Small Bowel Enema	Diagnostic procedure in which a tiny tube is passed through the mouth or nose and placed in the upper part of the small intestine. A small amount of barium liquid is injected through the tube and observed on a fluoroscope as it passes through the small intestine
Small Bowel Follow Through	Diagnostic procedure in which x-rays are taken of the small intestine as the barium liquid passes through it
Small Intestine	Largest part of the digestive tube that connects the stomach to the large intestine. The small intestine is divided into the duodenum, ileum and jejunum, and is the site where most of the digestion and food absorption occurs
SOD	Superoxide Dismutase. An antioxidant enzyme which helps protect cells from free-radical damage <BR>
Sodium	Essential mineral that our bodies regulate and conserve. Excess sodium retention increases the fluid volume (edema) and low sodium leads to less fluid and relative dehydration. The adult body averages a total content of over 100 grams of sodium, of which one-third is in bone. A small amount of sodium does get into cell interiors, but this represents only about 10% of the body content. The remaining 57 % or so of the body sodium content is in the fluid immediately surrounding the cells, where it is the major cation (positive ion). The role of sodium in the extracellular fluid is maintaining osmotic equilibrium (the proper difference in ions dissolved in the fluids inside and outside the cell) and extracellular fluid volume. Also involved in nerve impulse transmission, muscle tone and nutrient transport. Interelated to potassim. Increase in serum sodium is seen in conditions with water loss in excess of salt loss, as in profuse sweating, severe diarrhea or vomiting, polyuria (as in diabetes mellitus or insipidus), hypergluco ormineralocorticoidism, and inadequate water intake. Drugs causing elevated sodium include steroids with mineral ocorticoid activity, carbenoxolone, diazoxide, guanethidine, licorice, methyldopa, oxyphenbutazone, sodium bicarbonate, methoxyflurane, and reserpine. Decrease in sodium is seen in states characterized by intake of freewater or hypotonic solutions, as may occur in fluid replacement following sweating, diarrhea, vomiting, and diuretic abuse. Dilutional hyponatremia may occur in cardiac failure, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, malnutrition, and SIADH. There are many other causes of hyponatremia, mostly related to corticosteroid metabolic defects or renal tubular abnormalities. Drugs other than diuretics may cause hyponatremia, including ammonium chloride, chlorpropamide, heparin, amino glutethimide, vasopressin, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine
soln	Solution
Solu-medrol	Methylprednisolone, a form or prednisone, an adrenal corticosteroid, a powerful steroid
Soluble	Adjective describing a substance that is able to be dissolved in or as if in a fluid
Somatic	Body related. Any of the cells of the body that compose the organs, tissues, and parts of that individual other than the germ cells
Somatomedin	Any of several endogenous peptides produced especially in the liver that are dependent on and probably mediate growth hormone activity
Somnolence	Sleepiness
Soporific	Sleep inducing
Sorrel	Also called Common sorrel, Garden sorrel, Meadow sorrel, and Sourgrass. Used as an astringent, diuretic, and laxative. A decoction made from it has been used for hemorrhage in the stomach and for excessive menstruation.Consuming large quantities of sorrel can irritate the kidneys and produce mild to severe poisoning
sp gr	Specific Gravity
Spasmolytic	Anti-spasm
Spasticity	Muscle rigidity
Specific	Agent or remedy having a particular effect on a particular disease
Specific Resistance	Describes the ability of the body to respond to specific invading agents. Also known as immunity
Specificity	The ability of a test to fail on people you know don't have the infection. More precisely TN/(TN+FP), where TN is the number of true negatives and FP is the number of false positives
Sphincter	Ringlike band of muscle that constricts a passage or closes a natural body opening
Sphingomyelin	Any of a group of crystalline phosphatides that are obtained especially from nerve tissue and that on hydrolysis yield a fatty acid, Sphingosine, Choline, and Phosphoric acid
Sphingomyelinase	Any of several enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin and are lacking in some metabolic deficiency diseases (as Niemann-Pick disease) in which sphingomyelin accumulates in bodily organs such as the spleen and liver <BR>
Sphingosine	An unsaturated amino compound containing two hydroxyl groups and obtained by hydrolysis of various sphingomyelins, gangliosides and cerebrosides
Spirit	Alcohol or water-alcohol solution of medicinal substances, usually 10% alcohol: essence
Spirulina	Used for health rejuvenation and weight reduction, considered an excellent blood colon cleanser. Spirulina is very high in Vitamin B-12 content <BR>
Spleen	A part of lymphatic system, helps filter blood of bacteria and impurities. Organ located in the upper left abdomen. Stores red blood cells as well as other blood cells. Spleen can enlarge if a person has cirrhosis
Splenectomy	Surgical removal of the spleen
Splenic Flexure Syndrome	Gaseous distention in the left, upper portion of the colon leading to left, upper abdominal discomfort, which may radiate to the left chest and be confused with heart disease
Splenohepatomegaly	Abnormal enlargement of the spleen and the liver
Splenomegaly	Spleen enlargement
Sporadic	Random
sq	Square
Squaw Vine	Used extensively to treat several uterine difficulties, including painful menstruation and threat of miscarriage
ST	Stable Toxin, Stomach
St. John's Wort	Hypericum Perforatum. Also called Goatweed, Hypericum and Klamath Wee. An aromatic perennial herb which has been used for centuries for a wide variety of conditions. The plant's active compound, hypericin, has anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory activity. Hypericin has also been shown to have monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibiting activity, mimicking the action of antidepressant agents. Research has shown that St. John's Wort inhibits the growth of some strains of bacteria that are highly resistant to antibiotics, such as Staphylococcus aureus, enterococcus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. St. John's Wort has also been reported to have anti viral activity against herpes simplex virus, influenza virus and hepatitis B virus <BR>
Stage	A period or phase of disease characterized by certain symptoms. A condition in the course of a disease
Stasis	Keeping in check. A slowing or stopping of blood flow
Stasis Cirrhosis	A general term for cirrhosis due to obstruction of the outflow of the hepatic vein; see also cardiac cirrhosis
Stasis Liver	The liver in stasis cirrhosis
Stat	From the Latin statinum, meaning immediately
Status	Indicates the degree of medical urgency for patients awaiting heart or liver transplants
STD	Sexually Transmitted Disease, disease that is transmitted through sexual contact
Steatohepatitis	Previous names that have been used to identify this syndrome include nonalcoholic Laennecis, fatty liver hepatitis, steatonecrosis, diabetic hepatitis, nonalcoholic fatty liver, etc
Steatorrhea	Condition in which there is too much fat in the stool, usually leading to loose, greasy, and odorous stools
Steatosis	Fatty degeneration
Stenosis	Duct narrowing. Pathologic narrowing of a body opening, a hollow tube, or the digestive tract
Sterile	Free of live microorganisms or live bacteria
Sternutatory	Substance causing sneezing
Steroid	Any of a large number of hormonal substances with a similar basic chemical structure containing a 17-carbon 14-ring system and including the sterols and various hormones and glycosides
Sterol	Large subgroup of steroids
Sterols	Alcohol form of a steroid
Stevia	A safe, all natural alternative to artificial sweeteners and refined sugar in the diet. Used for alleviating bleeding gums, sore throats and cold sores due to its mild anti-bacterial functions. Has also been shown to inhibit the development of plaque and aid in the prevention of cavities. There has also been some claims that Stevia functions as an anti-diabetic agent. Stevia extracts contain negligible nutritive benefits <BR>
Stillingia Root	Also called Cockup hat, Marcory, Queen's delight, Queen's root, Silver leaf, and Yaw root. Used as a cathartic, diuretic, and emetic. An effective treatment for both tuberculosis and cancer. In large doses, Stillingia causes vomiting and diarrhea. Taken internally, the acrid constituents of the fresh plant can cause irritation and symptoms of poisoning
Stimulant	Agent that temporarily quickens the functional activities of the tissues
Stochastic Model	A mathematical model which takes into consideration the presence of some randomness in one or more of its parameters or variables. The predictions of the model therefore do not give a single point estimate but a probability distribution of possible estimates. We might distinguish demographic stochasticity which arises from the discreteness of individuals and individual events such as birth, and environmental stochasticity arising from more-or-less unpredictable interactions with the outside world
Stoma	Artificial opening. such as an opening in the abdominal wall created by surgery
Stomach	Large, irregularly shaped sac that is found between the esophagus and the small intestine
Stone Root	Collinsonia Canadensis. Exhibits antispasmodic, astringent, diaphoretic, diuretic, sedative, and tonic properties. A decoction of the fresh root has been given in catarrh of the bladder, dropsy, gravel and leucorrhoea. Can be used externally, especially the leaves, for poultices and fomentations on bruises, cuts, sores, wounds, and as a gargle
Stool	Feces; the waste matter discharged from the anus
Streptokinase	An enzyme that can break up and liquefy blood clots
Stricture	Narrowing of a hollow tube
Styptic	Agent that contracts tissues, checks bleeding by contracting the blood vessels
Subacute	Somewhat acute. Falling between acute and chronic in character particularly when closer to acute. Less marked in duration or severity than a corresponding acute state
Subcapsular	Below a tough outer covering
Subcelluar	Below the level of a complete cell. Group or stock of microorganisms made up of descendents of a single isolation in a pure culture
Subclinical	Mild
Subclinical Infection	An infection in which symptoms are sufficiently mild or inapparent to escape diagnosis other than by positive confirmation of the ability to transmit the infection or serologically
Subcutaneous	Below or under the skin
Subdural	Outside the brain
Subhepatic	Situated or occurring under the liver
Sublingual	A medication that is taken by dissolving under the tongue
Sublobular	Situated at the bases of the lobules of the liver
Sublobular Vein	One of several veins in the liver into which the central veins empty and which in turn empty into the hepatic veins
Subphrenic Space	A space on each side of the falciform ligament between the underside of the diaphragm and the upper side of the liver
Subsequent Treatment	Treatment started again after a patient has not responded to treatment or relapsed
Substrate	Substance on which an enzyme acts
Sucralfate	Drug that forms a protective coating around the base of an ulcer
Sudorific	Agent that induces perspiration; diaphoretic
Sugar-Icing Liver	Perihepatitis chronica hyperplastica
Sulfasalazine	Medication combining a sulfa component with a drug in the aspirin family. Used to treat mild to moderate attacks of inflammatory bowel disease and to maintain a state of remission between attacks. Thought to be more effective when the disease is in the colon rather than in the ileum
Sulfobromophthalein	A diagnostic material used in the form of its disodium salt in a liver function test
Sulfur	Involved in bone growth, blood clotting, and muscle metabolism. It also helps to counteract toxic substances in the body by combining with them to form harmless compounds
Suma	Also known as Para Toda. Research has shown that five of the pfaffosides found in Suma have been able to inhibit growth of cultured melanoma tumor cells. Suma is advocated as an effective adaptogen to support the immune system, adapt the body to external stresses, accelerate wound healingfight chronic fatigue syndrome, and to relieve pain
Sunflower	Helianthus Annuus. The seeds have diuretic and expectorant properties and are used in the treatment of bronchial, coughs and colds, laryngeal and pulmonary affections, and whooping cough
Superinfection	Secondary infection
Supine	Laying down
Suppository	Tubular medicinal mass which melts when inserted into a body orifice thereby releasing its active ingredients
Suppuration	Discharging pus
Suprahepatic	Situated superior to or on the surface of the liver
Survival Rates	Survival rates indicate how many patients or grafts (transplanted organs) are alive/functioning at a set time posttransplant. Survival rates are often given at one, three and five years. Policy modifications are never made without examining their impact on transplant survival rates. Survival rates improve with technological and scientific advances. Developing policies that reflect and respond to these advances in transplantation will also improve survival rates
Susceptible	An individual accessible to or liable to infection by a pathogen
Sustained Response	Response to therapy that continues over a long period of time. i.e Patient who is successfully treated and remains free of the disease/virus for at least 6 months after treatment has stopped
Suture	Stitch
Symptom	Noticeable change in the body or its function that indicate disease. A condition of the body reported by an individual when suffering from a disease; any evidence used in diagnosis or identification of infected individuals
Symptomatology	Study of symptoms
Synaptic	Relating to the association of homologous chromosomes with chiasma formation that is characteristic of the first meiotic prophase and is held to be the mechanism for genetic crossing-over
Synergist	Agent that increases the effectiveness of another agent when combined with it
Synergistic	Combined
Synthesis	Formation of a new compound by putting together simpler compounds or elements
Syringe	Medical instrument made up of a plunger, barrel and needle to inject fluids into the body
Syrup	Concentrated sugar solution with or without medicinal additives
Systemic	Whole body related
Systolic	Part of blood pressure reading. The top of the two blood pressure numbers, which measures the maximum blood pressure reached as blood is pumped out of the heart chambers
T Cell	Lymphocytes that are produced in the bone marrow and mature in the thymus. Responsible for mediating the second branch of the immune system called &quotcellular immune response." T cells can live for months to years. This lymphocyte population is defined by the presence of a rearranged T-cell receptor <BR>
T Cells	Cells that are involved in rejecting foreign tissue, controlling the production of antibodies in the presence of antigens, regulating immunity. One of the two major types of lymphocytes (white blood cells) There are two types of T-cells - "helper" T-cells and "killer" T-cells
T Lymphocyte	Mononuclear white blood cells having the property of destroying target cells
T Tube	Tube placed in the bile duct that allows bile to drain into a bag outside the body
T3 Uptake	This test measures the amount of thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) in the patient's serum. When TBG is increased, T3 uptake is decreased, and vice versa. T3 Uptake does not measure the level of T3 or T4 in serum. Increased T3 uptake (decreased TBG) in euthyroid patients is seen in chronic liver disease, protein-losing states, and with use of the following drugs: androgens, barbiturates, bishydroxycourmarin, chlorpropamide, corticosteroids, danazol, d-thyroxine, penicillin, phenylbutazone, valproic acid, and androgens. It is also seen in hyperthyroidism. Decreased T3 uptake (increased TBG) may occur due to the effects of exogenous estrogens (including oral contraceptives), pregnancy, acute hepatitis, and in genetically determined elevations of TBG. Drugs producing increased TBG include clofibrate, lithium, methimazole, phenothiazines, and propylthiouracil. Decreased T3 uptake may occur in hypothyroidism <BR>
T4	See Thyroxine
TACE	Transarterial Chemo-Embolization, Transcatheter Hepatic Artery Chemoembolization
TAE	Transcatheter Hepatic Artery Chemoembolization
Tamarack	Larix Americana. The bark, used as a decoction, is a diuretic, laxative, tonic, and alterative, used in the treatment of obstructions of the liver, jaundice, rheumatism, and some cutaneous diseases. A decoction of the Tamarack leaves has been used for diarrhea, dysentery, hemoptysis, piles, and menorrhagia
Taurine	Nonessential amino acid but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. May be needed for the proper development and maintenance of the central nervous system. Taurine's role in bile formation is important for fat metabolism and blood cholesterol control. Colorless crystalline cysteine derivative found in nerve tissue, in bile, and in the juices of muscle particularly in invertebrates. Helps stabilize the excitability of membranes which is important in the control of epileptic seizures
TB	Tuberculosis
TBG	Thyroxine-Binding Globulin
TE	Tracheoesophageal
Tea	Camellia Thea. Considered to be a strong stimulant and astringent. Rarely used as a medicine, but, the infusion is useful to help relieve neuralgic headaches
Tea Tree Oil	Also called Cajuput Oil. Used extensively as a anti-microbial, antiseptic, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, expectorant, and stimulant. Has also been used for colds, headaches, toothache, rheumatism, skin disorders and sore muscles <BR>
TEF	Tracheoesophageal Fistula
Telangiectasia	Broken veins
Teratogenic	Causing malformations in a fetus
Term	Definition
Terminal Bile Duct	The smallest branch of the portal tract-based biliary system; corresponds to the bile duct seen in terminal portal tracts
Terminal Hepatic Artery	The smallest branch of the hepatic artery; corresponds to hepatic artery seen in terminal portal tracts
Terminal Hepatic Vein	The smallest branch of the hepatic venous system situated in the center of the secondary as well as the classic lobule; also called the central vein
Terminal Portal Tract	A mesenchyme-based structure containing 1 or more parallel sets of (bile duct and hepatic artery), and only 1 portal venous channel; the classic "portal triad."
Terminal Portal Vein	The smallest branch of the portal vein that gives rise to portal venules. Corresponds to the portal vein seen in terminal portal tracts
Testing for Safety and Effectiveness	New drugs approved by the U.S. Government must not only be shown to be safe to use, but also to be effective at producing the desired effect. All candidate drugs must go through multiple phases of testing before they are approved. Early testing shows safety in animals and humans, while the later phases test for effectiveness and further confirm safety. This process is very expensive and may take many years. For this reason, many potential drugs remain untested
Testosterone	Naturally occurring androgenic hormone
Tetany	Muscle spasm
TF	Tube Feeding
Thalamus	Part of the brain
Therapeutic Range	Maximum effectiveness of a drug is generally found only for a narrow range of dosages. Below that range, the amount of drug in the body is too low to have the desired effect. Above that range, undesirable side effects or toxicity are produced. Drugs with a narrow therapeutic range (e.g., digitoxin), are more dangerous than drugs with a large therapeutic range (i.e. vitamin C)
Therapy	Treatment of a disease
Thiamine	Vitamin B-1. A B-complex vitamin that acts as a coenzyme necessary for the conversion of carbohydrates into glucose, which is burned in the body for energy. It is essential for the functioning of the nervous system as well as the muscles and heart, aids in the digestion of carbohydrates; stabilizes the appetite; and promotes growth & good muscle tone. A deficiency of Thiamin may lead to the loss of appetite, insomnia, weakness, fatigue, paralysis, nervous irritability, weight loss, minor aches & pains, mental depression & constipation, and heart & gastrointestinal problems
Thistle	Considered a diaphoretic, stimulant, tonic, emetic and emmenagogue. In large doses, Blessed Thistle acts as a strong emetic, producing vomiting with little pain and inconvenience. Also see Milk Thistle
Threonine	L-Threonine, Essential amino acid needed for proper growth in infants and maintenance of nitrogen balance in adults. Found in eggs, milk, gelatin, and other proteins. Helps prevents fat build-up in the liver; helps the digestive and intestinal tracts function more smoothly; and assists metabolism & assimilation
Thrill	A vibration that a doctor or nurse can feel by touch, often used to describe cardiac murmurs that can be felt through the chest wall
Thrombocytopenia	Low blood platelet count
Thrombocytosis	Increased platelets in the blood
Thromboembolism	Blood clotting
Thrombolytic	Dissolving blood clots
Thrombophlebitis	Vein inflammation plus blood clotting
Thrombosis	Blood clot
Thrombus	Blood clot
Thrush	Fungus infection in the mouth
Thyme	Also called Creeping thyme, Mountain thyme, and Wild thyme. Used as a anthelmintic, antispasmodic, carminative, diaphoretic, expectorant, and sedative. As a tincture, extract, or infusion, it is used for throat and bronchial problems, acute bronchitis, laryngitis, and whooping cough, diarrhea, chronic gastritis, and lack of appetite. Excessive internal use of Garden thyme can lead to symptoms of poisoning and to over stimulation of the thyroid gland
Thymidine	One of the four basic nucleotides that comprise DNA
Thymidine Kinase	An enzyme that is involved in DNA replication and that increases greatly during infection with some viruses (as the herpesvirus causing herpes simplex) and during periods of increased growth rate, as in liver regeneration
Thyrotoxicosis	Overactive thryoid
Thyroxine (T4)|Thyroxine	This is a measurement of the total thyroxine in the serum, including both the physiologically active (free) form, and the inactive form bound to thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG). It is increased in hyperthyroidism and in euthyroid states characterized by increased TBG. Occasionally, hyperthyroidism will not be manifested by elevation of T4 (free or total), but only by elevation of T3 (triiodothyronine). Therefore, if thyrotoxicosis is clinically suspect, and T4 and FTI are normal, the test &quotT3 -RIA" is recommended (this is not the same test as &quotT3 uptake," which has nothing to do with the amount of T3 in the patient's serum). T4 is decreased in hypothyroidism and in euthyroid states characterized by decreased TBG. A separate test for &quotfree T4" is available, but it is not usually necessary for the diagnosis of functional thyroid disorders <BR>
Thyroxine-Binding Globulin	A blood serum glycoprotein that is synthesized in the liver and that binds tightly to thyroxine and less firmly to triiodothyronine preventing their removal from the blood by the kidneys and releasing them as needed at sites of activity
tid	Three times a day
Tincture	Alcoholic solution of medicinal substances, usually 50% alcohol
Tisane	An infusion of flowers
Tissue Typing	Blood test (performed prior to transplantation) to evaluate the closeness of tissue match between donor's organ and recipient's HLA antigens
Titre	Concentration of a substance in solution
TIW	Three times a week
TMV	Tobacco Mosaic Disease
Tobacco	Nicotiana Tabacum. Tobacco is used as a diuretic, discutient, expectorant, sedative, and sialagogue, and internally only as an emetic, when all other emetics fail. Externally the nicotine in tobacco is an antiseptic
Tobacco Mosaic Disease	First recognized viral disease, tobacco mosaic disease is caused by the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). It attacks tobbaco leaves, causing a mosaic-like pattern of discolorations in the plant <BR>
Tocopherol	Any of several fat soluble, oily, phenolic compounds with antioxidant vitamin E activity
Tocotrienol	Form of vitamin E that differs from tocopherols by possessing three double bonds in its side chain rather than being saturated. Tocotrienols have recently been isolated and have antioxidant capabilities greater than vitamins C and E and their tocopherol counterpart
Tomography	CT scanning
Tonic	Drug or medicine that improves body tone by stimulating tissue nutrition. Substance that invigorates, restores, or stimulates the system
Topical	Applied to the surface
Toradol	Ketorolac, an injectable nonsteroid antiinflammatory agent often used as a substitute for morphine in intoxicated patients or for those patients suspected of seeking narcotics
Total Parenteral Nutrition	TPN. Intravenous infusion of all nutrients through a catheter placed in a large vein near the collar bone. TPN is used to ensure that malnourished patients or severely ill receive adequate nutrition, to rest the bowel, or to prepare poorly nourished patients for surgery
Total Protein	Increase in serum total protein reflects increases in albumin, globulin, or both. Generally significantly increased total protein is seen in volume contraction, venous stasis, or in hypergammaglobulinemia. Decrease in serum total protein reflects decreases in albumin, globulin or both
Tox Screen	Toxicological analysis of the blood, ordered when a drug overdose is suspected and the drugs need to be identified
Toxic Effects	The physiologic, physical, or laboratory manifestations or derangement's that can be attributed to the presence of a substance within the body
Toxic Threshold	The minimum dose of a medication or herbal remedy required to produce toxicity. This level is not always well- defined, as it may depend on the individual taking the treatment
Toxicity	Poisonousness
Toxicological	Poison study related
Toxin	Any chemical that interferes with normal cell function. Toxins may be man- made (such as DDT), or made by plants (phytotoxins), fungi (mycotoxins), or bacteria. Many herbal remedies obtain their effect from low levels of phytotoxins
Toxoids	Preparations of pathogenic organisms or their derivatives made nontoxic and intended for active immunologic prophylaxis. They include deactivated toxins
TPN	Total Parenteral Nutrition-- can provide all or most of a patient's nutrient requirements by intravenous means
Trace Element	Essential mineral that is essential to nutrition. Analytical chemists prefer to call minerals, trace elements and Nutritionists prefer to call minerals either minerals or trace minerals depending on the amount needed by the body
Trace Minerals	Minerals that occur in tiny amounts within the body. An aid in replacing electrolytes lost through heavy perspiration, diarrhea, and protect against toxic reaction and heavy metal poisoning. They are essential in the effective assimilation and utilization of vitamins and other nutrients
Transaminase	Enzyme
Transaminases	Liver enzymes in the blood which can signal liver infection. The same as ALT and AST
Transcortin	An alpha globulin produced in the liver that binds with and transports hydrocortisone in the blood
Transcriptase	RNA polymerase; an enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of RNA with DNA serving as a template, also known as RNA transcriptase
Transcutaneous	Through the skin
Transdermal	Through the skin
Transfusion	Introduction of whole blood or components of blood (platelets, plasma) from one person into the body of another
Transitory	Brief
Transmission	Passing of a disease or infection from one person to another. The process by which a pathogen passes from a source of infection to a new host. There are two major types: horizontal and vertical transmission. The majority of transmission processes operate horizontally
Transmission Chain	Illustration adapted from Dickinson & Gordon (1990) to show the necessary factors required for the transmission of viral hepatitis
Transmission Threshold	Occurs for a parasite when the basic reproductive rate Ro is equal to 1. Below this threshold level the disease is unable to maintain itself within the host population. Typically, for directly transmitted parasites there is a transmission threshold for the host population size
Transplantation	Implanting organs or tissue from one person to another
Treatment	Therapy, Administration or application of a remedy to a patient with an injury or disease
Triage	The system of prioritizing patients in an emergency situation in which there are a great number of injured or ill
Trichloroacetic Acid	CCI3COOH, Toxic, deliquescent, colorless crystals with a pungent aroma, used as a chemical intermediate and library reagent, and in medicine, pharmacy, and herbicides
Tricyclic	Drugs used to treat depression
Triglycerides	Lipids (fat-like substances) carried through the bloodstream to the tissues. The bulk of the body's fat tissue is in the form of triglycerides, stored for later use as energy. We get triglycerides primarily from the fat in our diet. Markedly increased triglycerides (>500 mg/dL) usually indicate a nonfasting patient (i.e., one having consumed any calories within 12-14 hour period prior to specimen collection). If patient is fasting, hypertriglyceridemia is seen in hyperlipoproteinemia types I, IIb, III, IV, and V. Exact classification theoretically requires lipoprotein electrophoresis, but this is not usually necessary to assess a patient's risk to atherosclerosis. Cholestyramine, corticosteroids, estrogens, ethanol, miconazole (intravenous), oral contraceptives, spironolactone, stress, and high carbohydrate intake are known to increase triglycerides. Decreased serum triglycerides are seen in abetalipoproteinemia, COPD, hyperthyroidism, malnutrition, and malabsorption states. Most important of three groups of neutral fats; the basic unit consists of a molecule of glycerol in ester bond with three molecules of fatty acid; it serves as the major storage form of fatty acids and is practically the exclusive constituent of adipose tissue
Tristis	Dull in color
Trivalent	With a valence of three
Trophic	Pertaining to the functions of nutrition, digestion and growth
Tropical Sprue	Condition of unknown cause in which abnormalities of the intestinal lining interfere with the normal absorption of food. Leads to excess fat in the stool. Characterized by anemia
Tropism	The ability of a virus to infect specific cell or tissue types
True-Positive	Test result that accurately gives a positive reading
Tryptophan	Essential amino acid. Natural relaxant and sleep aid due to its precursor role in serotonin (a neurotransmitter) synthesis. Along with tyrosine, it is used in the treatment of addictions. A natural relaxant, Tryptophan helps alleviate insomnia by inducing normal sleep; helps in the treatment of migraine headaches; helps the immune system; reduces anxiety & depression; helps reduce the risk of artery & heart spasms and works with Lysine in reducing cholesterol levels
TSH Test	Test is performed to assess the activity of the thyroid gland. It involves measuring the concentration of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the blood serum. TSH, which is secreted by the pituitary gland, stimulates the thyroid gland to produce hormones. A change in the level of TSH in the blood may signify a malfunctioning of the thyroid gland
TTH	Transfusion Transmitted Hepatitis
TTP	Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura
Tubercular	Nodular
Tubules	Small tubes
Tumor	Swelling or enlargement of body tissue that performs no useful function. It can be either cancerous (malignant) or harmless (benign)
Turkey Rhubarb	Helps to improve appetite, increase salivary & gastric flow, and promotes healthy liver function & bile flow. Acts both as a laxative in cases of constipation, and as an astringent in cases of diarrhea
Turmeric	Contains Curcumin. Curcumin increases the secretion of bile by stimulating the bile duct. It also protects the liver by detoxification, stimulating the gall bladder and scavenging free radicals. With the help of the adrenal glands, it inhibits both platelet aggregation and the enzymes which induce inflammatory prostaglandins. Curcumin may also help break down fats and reduce cholesterol. Large doses not recommended in cases of acute bilious colic, obstructive jaundice, painful gallstones, and extremely toxic liver disorders
Type & Crossmatch	Blood typing to identify patient's blood type
Type I Mortality	A mortality schedule in which all hosts are assumed to live for a fixed number of years equal to the life expectancy
Type II Mortality	A mortality schedule in which all hosts are assumed to die at a constant rate. This constant rate is equal to the inverse of the life expectancy
Tyramine	Amino acid synthesized in the body from the essential amino acid tyrosine that has a sympathomimetic action and is derived from tyrosin
Tyrosine	Nonessential amino acid but may be essential for individuals with certain diseases or nutritional concerns. May be important for neurotransmitter synthesis and mood regulation. May be useful for depression, allergies and addictive states. Tyrosine transmits nerve impulses to the brain; helps overcome depression; improves memory; increases mental alertness; and promotes the healthy functioning of the adrenal thyroid, and pituitary glands
Tyrosinemia	A rare inherited disorder of tyrosine metabolism that is characterized by abnormally high concentrations of tyrosine in the blood and urine with associated abnormalities especially of the liver and kidneys
U/A	Urinalysis, used to test for kidney failure, dehydration, diabetes, undernourishment, or bladder or kidney infection
UBW	Usual Body Weight
UDCA	Ursodeoxycholic Acid, Actigall
UDP	Hepatic Uridine Diphosphoglucuronate
UES	Upper Esophageal Sphincter
UGI	Upper Gastrointestinal
UIQ	Upper Inner Quadrant
Ulcer	Open sore on the skin surface or on a mucous surface such as the lining of the stomach
Ulcerative Colitis	Chronic inflammatory disease of the large intestine lining
Ulcerogenic	Ulcer causing
ULN	Upper Limit of Normal
ULQ	Upper Left Quadrant
Ultrasound	Also known as Ultrasonic imaging, ultrasonography, echoscanning. Diagnostic test in which sound pulses are sent into the body. The returning echoes are collected and a picture is produced from them. Uses the same technology as sonar
Uncoating	The stage of viral replication at which structural proteins are lost and the virus genome is exposed to the replication machinery
Unconjugated	Free
Unguent	Fatty medicinal preparation for external use that liquefies when rubbed into the skin
Unicorn Root, False|False Unicorn Root|Unicorn Root	Chamaelirium Luteum. Considered an diuretic, emetic, tonic, and Vermifuge. Useful in impotence, as a tonic in genito urinary weakness or irritability, liver and kidney diseases, especially in diseases due to poor action of the liver. In large doses, False Unicorn Root is a cardiac poison
Unicorn Root, True|True Unicorn Root|Unicorn Root	Aletris Farinosa. The fresh root of True Unicorn in large doses is somewhat emetic, cathartic and narcotic; when dried, these properties are lost. When dried, it becomes a bitter tonic and its tincture or decoction has been used in colic, flatulence, hysteria, and in dyspepsia where there is an absence of urinary phosphates. It has a tonic influence on the female generative organs, being of use in cases of habitual miscarriage <BR>
Unilateral	One sided, affecting one side
Unitdose	Single dose
Universal Precautions	Term used to describe various practical measures which can minimize the risk of infection from blood and body fluids
Unsaturated Fat	Type of fat that is usually liquid at refrigerator temperature. Monounsaturated fat and polyunsaturated fat are two kinds of unsaturated fat
UOQ	Upper Outer Quadrant
Upper GI Series	Barium Meal. Diagnostic procedure in which x-rays are taken after the patient swallows a liquid containing barium. The barium liquid helps to outline the esophagus, duodenum, and stomach so that they show up clearly on x-ray
UQ	Upper Quadrant
Urea	Main end product of mammalian protein metabolism, formed in the liver from amino acids and compounds of ammonia; the main nitrogenous compound of urine; an average person, excretes about 30 grams of urea per day
Urea Nitrogen (BUN)|Urea Nitrogen	Serum urea nitrogen (BUN) is increased in acute and chronic intrinsic renal disease, in states characterized by decreased effective circulating blood volume with decreased renal perfusion, in postrenal obstruction of urine flow, and in high protein intake states. Decreased serum urea nitrogen (BUN) is seen in high carbohydrate/low protein diets, states characterized by increased anabolic demand (late pregnancy, infancy, acromegaly), malabsorption states, and severe liver damage
Uremia	Kidney failure
URI	Upper Respiratory Infection
uria	(suffix)-Urine
Uric Acid	Increase in serum uric acid is seen idiopathically and in renal failure, disseminated neoplasms, toxemia of pregnancy, psoriasis, liver disease, sarcoidosis, ethanol consumption, etc. Many drugs elevate uric acid, including most diuretics, catacholamines, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, salicylates, and large doses of nicotinic acid. Decreased serum uric acid level may not be of clinical significance. It has been reported in Wilson's disease, Fanconi's syndrome, xanthinuria, and (paradoxically) in some neoplasms, including Hodgkin's disease, myeloma, and bronchogenic carcinoma. Uric acid is formed in the breakdown of nucleoproteins in the tissues, and excreted in the urine. It is found in the bloodstream within a normal range (2 - 8 milligrams per deciliter). Elevated blood uric acid levels can put patients at an increased risk for kidney stone formation
Uric Acid Levels	Uric acid is formed in the breakdown of nucleoproteins in the tissues, and excreted in the urine. It is found in the bloodstream within a normal range (2 - 8 milligrams per deciliter). Elevated blood uric acid levels can put patients at an increased risk for kidney stone formation
Uricase	An enzyme that promotes oxidation of uric acid to allantoin, carbon dioxide, and other products and that is found esp. in the liver, kidney, and brains of most animals other than primates
Urinary Tract Infection	UTI--Infection of one or more parts of the urinary tract
URO-D	Uroporphyrinogen Decarboxylase, a hepatic enzyme
URQ	Upper Right Quadrant
Ursodeoxycholic Acid	Drug, similar to Chenodeoxycholic Acid, that is being tested for safety and effectiveness in dissolving gallstones
Ursodiol	Actigall. A water-soluble bile acid found in high concentrations in the bile of bears. When administered to humans, it tends to replace less water-soluble bile acids in the bile. Ursodiol has been shown to reduce liver inflammation associated with a variety of chronic liver diseases, although whether is prevents progression to cirrhosis and liver failure is still under investigation. Also known as ursodeoxycholic acid and Actigall <BR>
USPHS	United States Public Health Service
UTI	Urinary Tract Infection
Uva Ursi	Also known as Bearberry, Bear's Grape, Kinnickinick, Mealberry, Mountain Cranberry and Whortleberry. Contains a plant glycoside, Arbutin, which breaks down in the body to form hydroquinone, a chemical compound that serves as an effective urinary antiseptic and astringent. Uva Ursi contains other compounds, including Ursolic acid, which is known to be an effective diuretic. Nausea and vomiting may occur in sensitive adults and children. Should not be taken with drugs that lead to the formation of acid urine
V	Vomiting
Vaccine	Preparation introduced into the body to cause the production of antibodies to create an immunity to specific diseases and viruses. A drug intended to induce active artificial immunity against a pathogen. Vaccines may be live or dead. Live vaccines are usually attenuated versions of the wildtype pathogen, such as the MMR vaccines, which are strains of measles mumps and rubella viruses repeatedly passaged through cell lines until non-pathogenic. Typically, live vaccines need only be given as a single dose to induce a full immunological response, inducing specific memory. Dead vaccines are either killed whole parasite, as with the Salk polio strain and pertussis vaccine, or some highly immunogenic fraction of the parasite, as in toxoid vaccines. Killed vaccines and toxoids which do not multiply in the host must usually be administered in multiple doses to induce a full immunological response. Vaccination should be distinguished from passive immunization in which concentrated specific antibodies which can be used therapeutically to abrogate an ongoing infection or to provide short term protection (of the order of months), for example against hepatitis A. Passive immunization does not induce immunological memory <BR>
Vagal	Nerve related
Vagotomy	Surgical procedure in which the nerves to the stomach are
Vagotonia	Nerve complaint
Vagus Nerve	Nerves to the stomach that are important in the production of stomach acid
Valerian Root	Valeriana Officinalis. Valerian is a root that has been used since ancient Greek times for its relaxing, sedative effects. Aside from the important valerenic acid, over 120 other important components have been identified from the root and its essential oil. Safe and effective anti-anxiety agent and sedative for treatment of restlessness and sleep disturbances resulting from nervous conditions. Those with impaired kidney or liver functions should not take valerian except under a physician's supervision. Valerian can interact with alcohol, certain antihistamines, muscle relaxants, psychotropic drugs and narcotics <BR>
Valine	Essential amino acid needed for optimal growth in infants and for nitrogen equilibrium in adults. Promotes mental vigor, muscle coordination and calm emotions
Van Den Bergh Test	A test indicating presence of bilirubin in the blood when a diazotizing reagent added to blood serum turns it red, as in jaundice and destructive diseases of the liver
Vanadium	Non-essential mineral. Believed that Vanadium is probably essential to growth and involved in fat metabolism. Vanadium deficiency can increase blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels
Variceal Bleeding	Bleeding from abnormal blood vessels in the esophagus. These may occur in cirrhosis
Varices	Esophageal and Gastric--Submucosal varices of the lower esophagus or gastric fundus mucosa, frequently caused by the development of portal collateral vessels as a result of portal hypertension. Abnormally dilated/stretched veins
Vascular	Blood vessel related
Vasculitis	Blood vessel inflammation
Vasoactive	Affecting blood vessels
Vasoconstriction	Narrowing of the small arteries
Vasodilatation	Widening of the blood vessels
Vasomotor	Blood flow-related
Vasopressor	Substance affecting blood flow
Vater's Ampulla	The dilatation formed by junction of the common bile duct and the pancreatic ducts proximal to their opening into the lumen of the duodenum
Vector	The intermediate hosts of parasites with indirect life cycles. Anything which transmits parasites. An organism responsible for transmitting a pathogen from one host to another, e.g. a mosquito. (In molecular biology, a molecule used to clone nucleic acid sequences)
Vectorial Capacity	In vector-borne infections such as malaria, the vectorial capacity is a concept analogous to the contact rate in directly-transmitted diseases. It is, thus, a function of (a) the vector's density in relation to its vertebrate host, (b) the frequency with which it takes blood meals on the host species, (c) the duration of the latent period in the vector, and (d) the vector's life expectancy <BR>
Vegetal Silica	Equisetum Arvense. Also known as horsetail and is a member of the Equisetaceae family. Vegital Silica, or Horsetail, is found in marshes and on the edges of ponds. The plant itself is more closely related to a fern, rather than a flower, due to its dull and flowerless appearance. It is a rush-like perennial with hollow, jointed stems and scale-like leaves <BR>
Vegetative	Without consciousness
VEGF	Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
Venepuncture	The process of entering a vein. Commonly used to describe the process of gaining a blood sample
Venipuncture	The process of entering a vein. Commonly used to describe the process of gaining a blood sample
Veno-Occlusive Disease-VOD|VOD|Veno-Occlusive Disease	The other major cause of hepatic venous outflow obstruction is veno-occlusive disease; it differs from Budd-Chiari syndrome in that it is the smaller intrahepatic venules within the liver that are primarily involved usually in a non-thrombotic manner. There is usually a defined exposure to a toxic agent or physical injury. In some parts of the world naturally occurring toxins (pyrrolizidine alkaloids - Jamaican bush tea) remains a significant cause of hepatic disease, particularly in children. Presently in the United States bone marrow transplantation is the most frequent setting for the development of VOD. This is related to the radiation and chemotherapeutic agents used in these patients. Renal transplant patients receiving immunosuppression agents are also at risk for VOD
Venogram	A procedure in which a contrast medium is injected into a vein so that an X-ray photograph will reveal the shape, size, and extent of the vein.
Venous	Vein related
Ventilator	Machine that helps a patient breathe
Vermifuge	Agent that destroys or expels parasitic worms, especially of the intestine
Versed	A benzodiazepine muscle relaxant used to sedate, often in conjunction with the paralyzing agent pavulon
Vertical Transmission	Vertical transmission occurs when a parent conveys an infection to its unborn offspring, as occurs in syphilis in man or in many arboviruses of arthropods. Perinatal infection is a special form of vertical transmission
Very Low Density Lipoprotein	Class of low density conjugated proteins consisting of a protein and a lipid
Vesicles	Small bubbles of lipid within a cell, used for the transport of materials within the cell and between the outside environment and the cell membrane . Small bladder or sac containing liquid
VH	Viral Hepatitis
VHDL	Very High Density Lipoprotein
Vial	small bottle with a rubber stopper from which medicine or doses are supplied
VIP	Vasoactive Intestinal Polypeptide
Viral	Pertaining to a virus in origin
Viral Carrier	An individual who is infected with a quantity of specific viral material and is seen as being potentially infective to others
Viral Envelope Proteins	Layers of protein which surround the capsid in animal viruses with tubular nucleocapsids. The envelope consists of an inner layer of lipids and virus specified proteins also called membrane or matrix proteins. The outer layer consists of one or more types of morphological subunits called peplomers which project from the viral envelope; this layer always consists of glycoproteins
Viral Hepatitis	Form of hepatitis caused by one of the hepatitis viruses. HAV, HBV, HCV, HDV, HEV, HGV
Viral Hepatitis Vaccines	Any vaccine raised against any virus or viral derivative that causes hepatitis
Viral Load	The amount of virus present in a person’s blood stream. It is usually measured by the PCR quantitative test and the result is given in number of virus particles per ml of blood
Viral Particle	New viruses reproduced inside of a cell
Viral Proteins	Proteins found in any species of virus. Among the most important characteristics of a virus is the nature of the proteins which make up its envelope, capsid, and spikes. Proteins determine the infective properties of the virus
Viral Quantity	Referring to the amount of virus present in the body. Also called viral load
Viral Titer	Measurement of the amount of virus present
Viremia	Presence of a particular virus in a patient's blood
Virion	Rudimentary virus particle with a central nucleoid surrounded by a protein sheath, complete virus particle. A mature and infectious virus particle.Structurally mature, extracellular virus particles
Viroid	Composed of nothing more than a single, circular strand of genetic material, and cause disease in plant cells. Replicating in the nuclei of plant cells, often cause s striking diseases in their host plants. Lacking even a protective shell of protein, viroids do not spread easily from one cell or plant to another
Virulence	The case mortality rate of an infection. The extent to which a pathogen harms its host. These are different usages: what they have in common is that they refer to the effect on an already infected host, not to the degree of transmissibility to a subsequent susceptible
Virus	A vast group of minute structures, composed of a sheath of protein encasing a core of nucleic acids which are the building blocks of RNA and DNA. They are capable of infecting almost all members of the animal and plant kingdoms, including bacteria. Viruses are characterised by a total dependence on living host cells for reproduction and lack independent metabolism. Most viruses only infect one species. HCV only infects humans. 2. Living virus that can multiply in the body and cause disease 3. Sub-microscopic life form that uses host cells - bacteria, plant cells, or even human body cells to reproduce itself. A virus normally consists of a small amount of genetic material (which it uses to reproduce itself) and a protective coat. Viruses are very small, most human viruses are less than 150 nanometers in diameter <BR>
Virus Attachment Protein	The protein on the surface of a virus particle responsible for binding the receptor
Virus Diseases	General term for diseases produced by viruses
Virusoid	Extremely simple virus, normally consisting of little more than a single circular strand of genetic material. Virusoids infect other viruses, using the replication processes of the host virus to replicate themselves instead
Visceral	Relating to an organ in the chest area
Viscerotome	Instrument used to obtain a liver tissue sample from a cadaver
Viscus	An internal organ of the body; particularly one located in the large cavity of the trunk such as the heart, liver, or intestine
Vitals	Vital organs such as the brain, heart, liver, and lungs
Vitamin	Organic compound essential in small quantities for normal physiologic and metabolic functioning of the body. Vitamins help regulate metabolism, help convert fat and carbohydrates into energy, and assist in forming bone and tissue. Vitamins cannot be assimilated without ingesting food
Vitamin A	Beta Carotene. Fat soluble vitamin essential for health. Plays an important part in the growth and repair of body tissue, protects epithelial tissue, helps maintain the skin and is necessary for night vision. It is also necessary for normal growth and formation of bones and teeth, for the production of red and white corpuscles in the blood, and for lactation. A deficiency of Vitamin A may result in night blindness; rough, dry, scaly skin; increased susceptibility to infections; lack of tearing; loss of smell & appetite; frequents fatigue and/or defective teeth & retarded gum growth
Vitamin B-1	Thiamin. Plays a key role in the body's metabolic cycle for generating energy; aids in the digestion of carbohydrates; promotes growth good muscle tone, essential for the normal functioning of the nervous system, muscles heart, and stabilizes the appetite. A deficiency of Vitamin B1 may lead to the loss of appetite; weakness fatigue; paralysis nervous irritability; loss of weight; insomnia; minor aches pains; mental depression constipation, and/or heart gastrointestinal problems
Vitamin B-12	Cobalamin. Essential for the normal functioning of all body cells, especially those of bone marrow, gastrointestinal tract and nervous system Also necessary for the formation of red blood cells. Prevents pernicious anemia and is necessary to a healthy nervous system. It is involved in synthesis of genetic material (DNA). It iss needed for effective calcium absorption in the body. A deficiency of Cobalamin may lead to pernicious anemia, poor appetite, brain damage, degeneration of spinal cord, depression, nervousness, neuritis, growth failure in children, tiredness, and/or lack of balance <BR>
Vitamin B-15	Pangamic Acid. Has antioxidant properties. Protects against urban air pollutants, protects the liver from the ravages of alcohol, stimulates increased immune system response, extends cell life, cures fatigue, lowers blood cholesterol levels, wards off hangovers, and assist sin the regulation of hormones <BR>
Vitamin B-3	Niacin. Improves circulation and reduces the cholesterol level in the blood; reduces high blood pressure; helps metabolize protein, sugar &amp; fat; maintains the nervous system; increases energy through proper utilization of food; prevents pellagra; and helps maintain a healthy skin, tongue &amp; digestive system. A deficiency of Niacinamide may result in fatigue, gastrointestinal disturbance, headaches, indigestion, irritability, loss of appetite, mental depression, nervousness, minor aches &amp; pains, insomnia, skin disorders, muscular weakness, bad breath, and/or canker sores <BR>
Vitamin B2	Riboflavin. Essential for cell growth and for enzymatic reactions by which the body metabolizes proteins, carbohydrates and fats. Aids in the formation of antibodies and red blood cells; maintains cell respiration; necessary for the maintenance of good vision, hair, nails and skin, alleviates eye fatigueand promotes general health. A deficiency of Vitamin B2 may result in itching and burning eyes; bloodshot eyes; dermatitis; digestive disturbances; sores in the mouth & on the lips; purplish tongue; retarded growth; sluggishness; trembling; and/or oily skin
Vitamin B6	Pyridoxine. A relatively little-known vitamin. Vitamin B6 takes part in many enzyme reactions and is particularly important for brain and nervous system functions. It is necessary for the synthesis & breakdown of amino acids, aids in fat and carbohydrate metabolism; maintains the central nervous system; aids in the formation of antibodies; aids in the removal of excess fluid of premenstrual women; promotes healthy skin; reduces hand numbness, leg cramps, muscle spasms, nausea , stiffness of hands; helps maintain a proper balance of sodium & phosphorous in the body. A deficiency of Vitamin B6 may result in anemia, dermatitis, insomnia, loss of hair, nervousness, skin eruptions, loss of muscular control, mouth disorders, muscular weakness, arm & leg cramps, slow learning, and/or water retention, but B-6 deficiency is rare
Vitamin C	Known as ascorbic acid, Vitamin C is a water-soluble antioxidant vitamin essential to the body's health. As an antioxidant, inhibits the formation of nitrosamines (a suspected carcinogen). Vitamin C is important for maintenance of bones, teeth, collagen and blood vessels (capillaries). Vitamin C also enhances iron absorption and red blood cell formation. Vitamin C also promotes the body's effective use of other nutrients, such as iron, B vitamins, vitamins A and E, calcium, and certain amino acids. By promoting the formation of strong connective tissue, it helps to heal wounds and burns. Stress, fever, and infection increase the body's need for vitamin C. A deficiency of Vitamin C may lead to soft & bleeding gums, bruising, anemia, loss of appetite, slow healing wounds & fractures, nosebleeds, swollen or painful joints, tooth decay, muscular weakness, skin hemorrhages, capillary weakness, and/or impaired digestion
Vitamin D	Fat soluble vitamin essential to health. Regulates the amount of calcium and phosphorus in the blood by improving their absorption and utilizaion. Vitamin D improves absorption and utilization of Calcium and Phosphorous; required for bone and teeth formation; maintains a stable nervous system and normal heart action. A deficiency of Vitamin D may lead to rickets, softening of bones, lack of energy, tooth decay, improper healing of fractures, muscular weakness, and/or inadequate absorption of calcium, and retention of phosphorous in the kidneys
Vitamin E	Tocopherol. Essential fat-soluble vitamin. As an antioxidant, helps protect cell membranes, liprproteins, fats and vitamin A from destructive oxidation. Helps protect red blood cells. A major anti-oxidant nutrient; retards cellular aging due to oxidation; supplies oxygen to the blood which is then carried to the heart and other organs; thus alleviating fatigue; strengthens the capillary walls & prevents the red blood cells from destructive poisons; aids in bringing nourishment to cells; prevents & dissolves blood clots. A deficiency of Vitamin E may lead to a rupture of red blood cells, lack of sexual vitality, abnormal fat deposits in muscles, degenerative changes in the changes in the heart and other muscles; and/or dry skin
Vitamin K	Necessary for the synthesis by the liver of the blood clotting enzyme prothrombin
Vitamin Toxicity	Certain vitamins and minerals can accumulate in the body when taken at doses above their toxic threshold. This is particularly likely with vitamins A and D, as these tend to accumulate in body fat where they cannot be cleared by the kidneys
Vitex	Also known as Chaste Tree. Used for normalizing the activity of female sex hormones, and is thus indicated for dysmenorrhoea, premenstrual stress, (PMS) and other disorders related to hormone function. Especially useful during menopausal changes
VLDL	Very Low Density Lipoprotein. A plasma lipoprotein that is produced primarily by the liver with lesser amounts contributed by the intestine, that contains relatively large amounts of triglycerides compared to protein, and that leaves a residue of cholesterol in the tissues during the process of conversion to LDL
VOD	Veno-occlusive Disease.
Vulnerary	Agent used for promoting the healing of wounds, curative
VZV	Varicella-zoster virus: a herpes virus which causes chickenpox (varicella) and shingles (herpes-zoster)
w/v|w v	Abbreviation for weight in volume
Waiting List	After evaluation by the transplant physician, a patient is added to the national waiting list by the transplant center. Lists are specific to both geographic area and organ type: heart, lung, kidney, liver, pancreas, intestine, heart-lung, kidney-pancreas. Each time a donor organ becomes available, the UNOS (United Network for Organ Sharing) computer generates a list of potential recipients based on factors that include genetic similarity, organ size, medical urgency and time on the waiting list. Through this process, a new list is generated each time an organ becomes available. <BR>
Wandering Liver	A displaced and movable liver
Wasserman Test	A blood test once widely used to diagnose syphilis
Waste	Useless matter. To become thin
Water Hammer Pulse	A pulse characterized by a rapid forceful ascent or upstroke
Waxy Liver	Albuminoid liver
WBC	Abbreviation for White blood cell, White blood count. The WBC is really a nonparameter, since it simply represents the sum of the counts of granulocytes, lymphocytes, and monocytes per unit volume of whole blood. Automated counters do not distinguish bands from segs; however, it has been shown that if all other hematologic parameters are within normal limits, such a distinction is rarely important. Trying to reliably distinguish bands from segs under the microscope is fraught with reproducibility problems
Weeping	Leakage of a fluid, A raw or excoriated surface bathed with a moist discharge
Western Blot Assay	Test used to analyze proteins in the blood to see if a virus exists
Wheat Grass	Rich in nutritional food, and contains a great variety of minerals, vitamins, and trace elements
White Bile	The colorless liquid containing mucoproteins and calcium salts sometimes found in the gallbladder in obstructions above the entrance of the cystic duct. Its accumulation in the distended biliary tract is called hydrops <BR>
White Birch Bark	Considered both an astringent and bitter. A leaf tea made by infusion is said to dissolve kidney stones when taken daily over a period of time. Has also been used successfully as a cream, salve, wash and/or bath additive for the treatment of skin problems, including Melanoma
White Blood Cell	WBC. Leukocyte, blood cell that does not contain hemoglobin and plays a major role in our immune defense system. Cells which form the basic constituents of the human immune system
White Blood Cells	Cells that fight infection. Leukocyte, White corpuscles in the blood. They are spherical, colorless, and nucleated masses involved with host defenses. Normal white blood cell counts are variable with age and sex. Normal adult range is 4,500 to 11,000 cells per cubic millimeter of blood. Slightly higher counts are seen in children. Elevated counts can be seen in cases of inflammation and infection
White Walnut	Also called Butternut Bark of Root. Has cathartic properties. Good as a laxative, also as a treatment for liver disorders and intestinal sickness. Also used to expel, rather than kill, worms (vermifuge) during the normal course of laxative induced cleansing of the body
White Willow Bark	Used to soothe headaches, break fevers, and reduce pain and swelling in arthritic joints. Also beneficial for cancer, heartburn, infections, and neuralgia. It is used in dyspepsia connected with the debility of the digestive organs. As an astringent, it has been used for internal bleeding and as a diuretic for gouty and rheumatic problems. If you are pregnant or nursing please check with your physician before using, Individuals who are allergic to salycylates should avoid Willow bark
WHO	World Health Organization
Wild Balsam	Impatiens Aurea. Also called Jewelweed. Has an acrid, burning taste and acts strongly as an cathartic, emetic, and diuretic, is considered dangerous, and its use is questionable
Wild Cherry Bark	Excellent calming and soothing agent for irritated mucosal surfaces
Wild Indigo	Exhibits anti-microbial and anti-catarrhal properties. Especially useful in the treatment of infections and catarrh in the ear, nose and throat. Wild Indigo may be used for cases of tonsillitis, laryngitis, pharyngitis and catarrhal infections of the nose and sinus. Taken internally, and as a mouthwash, Wild Indigo will heal mouth ulcers, gingivitis and help control pyorrhea. Used in all diseases of the glandular system, and in hepatic derangements especially, with symptoms of the character. For the treatment of infections, Wild Indigo can be used with Echinacea and Myrrh. For lymphatic problems, it can be combined with Poke Root and Cleavers
Wild Pansy	Viola Tricolor. Also called Heartsease. The herbaceous parts of the plant have been employed for their demulcent, mucilaginous, and expectorant properties. The root and seeds are also emetic and purgative, which properties as well as the expectorant action of the plant are doubtless due to the presence of the Violine
Wild Yam	Dioscorea. Used as a spasmolytic, anti-inflammatory, mild diaphoretic, anti-rheumatic, and it is used for treating: cramps, diverticulitis, intestinal colic, intermittent claudication, muscular rheumatism, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and ovarian &amp; uterine pain <BR>
Willow	Exhibits analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and tonic properties. Considered to be the natural form and origin of the modern day aspirin.
Wilson's Disease	Inherited condition in which increased amounts of copper are found in the liver. Can lead to progressive destruction of the liver, to cirrhosis, and to damage in the central nervous system. Also called Hepatolenticular Degeneration
Witch Hazel	Has astringent, sedative, tonic, and homeostatic properties. Used in decoctions, infusions, ointments, poultices, suppositories, fluid extracts, and distilled extracts, as a powdered drug, and in cosmetics. Recommended for treating bruises, diarrhea, dysentery, internal and external hemorrhage, inflammation, insect bites, hemorrhoids, varicose veins, burns, scalds, and dark circles under the eyes
wk	Week
Wood Betony	Also called Betony. Possesses mild astringent properties. Used occasionally for diarrhea, or as a mouthwash to soothe mucous membranes of the mouth and throat. Use as a tincture or infusion it is used for chronic headaches and to treat anxiety and nervousness
Woody Nightshade	Solanum Dulcamara. Used in the treatment of asthma, chronic bronchial catarrh, and whooping cough. Also a popular remedy for obstinate skin eruptions, scrofula and ulcers
Work Up	To investigate a patients illness by a variety of means, including xrays, patient history, physical examination, blood work studies
Wormwood	Exhibits bitter, anti-microbial, carminative, and anthelmintic properties. Powerful remedy in the treatment of worm infestations, especially pinworm and roundworm. Also used to help the body deal with fever and infections
wt	Weight
X	Symbol for the decimal scale of potency or dilution, used by homeopaths
Xanth, Xantho|Xanth|Xantho	A combining form meaning yellow
Xanthoma	A yellow tumor
Xanthopsin	Yellow vision, the condition in which objects look yellow, sometimes occurs in jaundice
Xer, Xero|Xer|Xero	A combining form meaning dry
Xerophthalmia	Dry eyes
Xerostomia	Dry mouth
Yarrow	Exhibits anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, astringent, bitter, diaphoretic, diuretic, hepatic and hypotensive properties. Standard remedy for helping the body to deal with fevers. Stimulates digestion and tones blood vessels. Considered to be a specific in thrombotic conditions associated with hypertension
Yellow Bile	One of the four humors of ancient and medieval physiology that was believed to be secreted by the liver and to cause irascibility
Yellow Dock	Generally considered to be mildly effective as a laxative. Ground up and brewed, Yellow Dock root makes a bitter sweet tea that has been used by herbalists in the treatment of a variety of disorders, mainly to treat enlarged liver and to purify the blood. Side effects of excess consumption of yellow dock include excessive urination, nausea and diarrhea
Yellow Fever	An acute viral disease transmitted to man by mosquitoes and characterized by fever, icterus, bradycardia, proteinuria and a bleeding tendency. A RNA virus that multiplies in the cytoplasm of cells; transmitted by arthropods
Yellow Gentian	Also called Bitter root, Bitterwort, Gentian Root, and Pale Gentian. Used for catarrhal gastritis with diarrhea, heartburn, indigestion, stomachache, and vomiting. Excellent for improving appetite and digestion, and strengthening the activity of the stomach
Yellow Root	Hydrastis
Yerba Santa	Eriodictyon Californicum--Used as a treatment for asthma, bronchial congestion, and hayfever. Quiets nagging coughs, relieves congestion due to allergies, and helps clear the chest of phlegm
Yohimbe Bark	Effective in elevating mood and reducing depression and anxiety. Stimulates sexual desire and performance. Studies have also recently found evidence that Yohimbe may aid in weight loss by suppressing the body's ability to store fat. Side effects, can include sweating, nausea and vomiting. Patients taking MAO inhibitors such as antidepressants , tranquilizers, or blood pressure medications should not take Yohimbe or any compounds containing yohimbine. Use of Yohimbe is also contraindicated for pregnant women as well as persons with diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease, or ulcers. Persons with a history of psychoses should also avoid Yohimbe as it has been known to trigger new episodes of psychic reaction
yr	Year
Yucca	Yucca Aloifolia. Y. Brevifolia. Y. Glauca. Y. Whipplei. There are about forty species of Yucca that grow in the warmer parts of North America and few are present in colder climates. Rich in steroid like saponins that elevate the body's production of cortisone, which may explain this herbs reported ability to aid in managing arthritic pains
Zellweger Syndrome	A rare, autosomal recessive congenital syndrome of multiple abnormalities. Some of the principal characteristics are cerebral dysfunction, defective myelinization, craniofacial abnormalities, renal cysts, hepatomegaly, and biliary dysgenesis. Absence of liver and kidney peroxisomes is the underlying basic defect
Zinc	Essential trace mineral. The functions of zinc are enzymatic. There are over 70 metalloenzymes known to require zinc for their functions. The main biochemicals in which zinc has been found to be necessary include: enzymes and enzymatic function, carbohydrate metabolism and protein synthesis . Zinc is a constituent of insulin and male reproductive fluid. Necessary for the proper metabolism of alcohol, to get rid of the lactic acid that builds up in working muscles and to transfer it to the lungs. Zinc is involved in the health of the immune system, assists vitamin A utilization and is involved in the formation of bone and teeth
Zinc Chloride	Assists in the absorption of the herbal nutrients & active ingredients through the dermal layer, and then into the bloodstream. Compound occasionally used in escharotic skin creams & salves for the treatment of skin cancer and other dermal and epidermal conditions
Zoonosis	A parasite naturally transmitted between man and other vertebrate species
Zoster	Herpes zoster
Zymosis	Any infectious or contagious disease. The development of spread of an infectious disease
